What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles assumed when he hid
himself among women, although puzzling questions, are not beyond all
conjecture.--_Sir Thomas Browne_

The mental features discoursed of as the analytical, are in
themselves, but little susceptible of analysis.  We appreciate them
only in their effects.  We know of them, among other things, that
they are always to their possessor, when inordinately possessed, a
source of the liveliest enjoyment.  As the strong man exults in his
physical ability, delighting in such exercises as call his muscles
into action, so glories the analyst in that moral activity which
disentangles.  He derives pleasure from even the most trivial
occupations bringing his talent into play.  He is fond of enigmas, of
conundrums, hieroglyphics; exhibiting in his solutions of each a
degree of acumen which appears to the ordinary apprehension
preternatural.  His results, brought about by the very soul and
essence of method, have, in truth, the whole air of intuition.

The faculty of resolution is possibly much invigorated by
mathematical study, and especially by that highest branch of it
which, unjustly, and merely on account of its retrograde operations,
has been called, as if par excellence, analysis.  Yet to calculate is
not in itself to analyze.  A chess-player, for example, does the one,
without effort at the other.  It follows that the game of chess, in
its effects upon mental character, is greatly misunderstood.  I am
not now writing a treatise, but simply prefacing a somewhat peculiar
narrative by observations very much at random; I will, therefore,
take occasion to assert that the higher powers of the reflective
intellect are more decidedly and more usefully tasked by the
unostentatious game of draughts than by all the elaborate frivolity
of chess.  In this latter, where the pieces have different and
bizarre motions, with various and variable values, what is only
complex, is mistaken (a not unusual error) for what is profound.  The
attention is here called powerfully into play.  If it flag for an
instant, an oversight is committed, resulting in injury or defeat.
The possible moves being not only manifold, but involute, the chances
of such oversights are multiplied; and in nine cases out of ten, it
is the more concentrative rather than the more acute player who
conquers.  In draughts, on the contrary, where the moves are unique
and have but little variation, the probabilities of inadvertence are
diminished, and the mere attention being left comparatively
unemployed, what advantages are obtained by either party are obtained
by superior acumen.  To be less abstract, let us suppose a game of
draughts where the pieces are reduced to four kings, and where, of
course, no oversight is to be expected.  It is obvious that here the
victory can be decided (the players being at all equal) only by some
recherch√© movement, the result of some strong exertion of the
intellect.  Deprived of ordinary resources, the analyst throws
himself into the spirit of his opponent, identifies himself
therewith, and not unfrequently sees thus, at a glance, the sole
methods (sometimes indeed absurdly simple ones) by which he may
seduce into error or hurry into miscalculation.

Whist has long been known for its influence upon what is termed the
calculating power; and men of the highest order of intellect have
been known to take an apparently unaccountable delight in it, while
eschewing chess as frivolous.  Beyond doubt there is nothing of a
similar nature so greatly tasking the faculty of analysis.  The best
chess-player in Christendom may be little more than the best player
of chess; but proficiency in whist implies capacity for success in
all these more important undertakings where mind struggles with mind.
When I say proficiency, I mean that perfection in the game which
includes a comprehension of all the sources whence legitimate
advantage may be derived.  These are not only manifold, but
multiform, and lie frequently among recesses of thought altogether
inaccessible to the ordinary understanding.  To observe attentively
is to remember distinctly; and, so far, the concentrative
chess-player will do very well at whist; while the rules of Hoyle
(themselves based upon the mere mechanism of the game) are
sufficiently and generally comprehensible.  Thus to have a retentive
memory, and proceed by "the book," are points commonly regarded as
the sum total of good playing.  But it is in matters beyond the
limits of mere rule that the skill of the analyst is evinced.  He
makes, in silence, a host of observations and inferences.  So,
perhaps, do his companions; and the difference in the extent of the
information obtained, lies not so much in the validity of the
inference as in the quality of the observation.  The necessary
knowledge is that of what to observe.  Our player confines himself
not at all; nor, because the game is the object, does he reject
deductions from things external to the game.  He examines the
countenance of his partner, comparing it carefully with that of each
of his opponents.  He considers the mode of assorting the cards in
each hand; often counting trump by trump, and honor by honor, through
the glances bestowed by their holders upon each.  He notes every
variation of face as the play progresses, gathering a fund of thought
from the differences in the expression of certainty, of surprise, of
triumph, or chagrin.  From the manner of gathering up a trick he
judges whether the person taking it can make another in the suit.  He
recognizes what is played through feint, by the manner with which it
is thrown upon the table.  A casual or inadvertent word; the
accidental dropping or turning of a card, with the accompanying
anxiety or carelessness in regard to its concealment; the counting of
the tricks, with the order of their arrangement; embarrassment,
hesitation, eagerness, or trepidation--all afford, to his apparently
intuitive perception, indications of the true state of affairs.  The
first two or three rounds having been played, he is in full
possession of the contents of each hand, and thenceforward puts down
his cards with as absolute a precision of purpose as if the rest of
the party had turned outward the faces of their own.

The analytical power should not be confounded with simple ingenuity;
for while the analyst is necessarily ingenious, the ingenious man is
often remarkably incapable of analysis.  The constructive or
combining power, by which ingenuity is usually manifested, and to
which the phrenologists (I believe erroneously) have assigned a
separate organ, supposing it a primitive faculty, has been so
frequently seen in those whose intellect bordered otherwise upon
idiocy, as to have attracted general observation among writers on
morals.  Between ingenuity and the analytic ability there exists a
difference far greater, indeed, than that between the fancy and the
imagination, but of a character very strictly analogous.  It will be
found, in fact, that the ingenious are always fanciful, and the truly
imaginative never otherwise than analytic.

The narrative which follows will appear to the reader somewhat in the
light of a commentary upon the propositions just advanced.

Residing in Paris during the spring and part of the summer of 18--, I
there became acquainted with a Monsieur C. Auguste Dupin.  This young
gentleman was of an excellent, indeed of an illustrious family, but,
by a variety of untoward events, had been reduced to such poverty
that the energy of his character succumbed beneath it, and he ceased
to bestir himself in the world, or to care for the retrieval of his
fortunes.  By courtesy of his creditors, there still remained in his
possession a small remnant of his patrimony; and, upon the income
arising from this, he managed, by means of a rigorous economy, to
procure the necessaries of life, without troubling himself about its
superfluities.  Books, indeed, were his sole luxuries, and in Paris
these are easily obtained.

Our first meeting was at an obscure library in the Rue Montmartre,
where the accident of our both being in search of the same very rare
and very remarkable volume, brought us into closer communion.  We saw
each other again and again.  I was deeply interested in the little
family history which he detailed to me with all that candor which a
Frenchman indulges whenever mere self is the theme.  I was
astonished, too, at the vast extent of his reading; and, above all, I
felt my soul enkindled within me by the wild fervor, and the vivid
freshness of his imagination.  Seeking in Paris the objects I then
sought, I felt that the society of such a man would be to me a
treasure beyond price; and this feeling I frankly confided to him.
It was at length arranged that we should live together during my stay
in the city; and as my worldly circumstances were somewhat less
embarrassed than his own, I was permitted to be at the expense of
renting, and furnishing in a style which suited the rather fantastic
gloom of our common temper, a time-eaten and grotesque mansion, long
deserted through superstitions into which we did not inquire, and
tottering to its fall in a retired and desolate portion of the
Faubourg St. Germain.

Had the routine of our life at this place been known to the world, we
should have been regarded as madmen--although, perhaps, as madmen of
a harmless nature.  Our seclusion was perfect.  We admitted no
visitors.  Indeed, the locality of our retirement had been carefully
kept a secret from my own former associates; and it had been many
years since Dupin had ceased to know or be known in Paris, We existed
within ourselves alone.

It was a freak of fancy in my friend (for what else shall I call it?)
to be enamored of the night for her own sake; and into this
bizarrerie, as into all his others, I quietly fell; giving myself up
to his wild whims with a perfect abandon.  The sable divinity would
not herself dwell with us always; but we could counterfeit her
presence.  At the first dawn of the morning we closed all the massy
shutters of our old building; lighted a couple of tapers which,
strongly perfumed, threw out only the ghastliest and feeblest of
rays, By the aid of these we then busied our souls in
dreams--reading, writing, or conversing, until warned by the clock of
the advent of the true Darkness.  Then we sallied forth into the
streets, arm in arm, continuing the topics of the day, or roaming far
and wide until a late hour, seeking, amid the wild lights and shadows
of the populous city, that infinity of mental excitement which quiet
observation can afford.

At such times I could not help remarking and admiring (although from
his rich ideality I had been prepared to expect it) a peculiar
analytic ability in Dupin.  He seemed, too, to take an eager delight
in its exercise--if not exactly in its display--and did not hesitate
to confess the pleasure thus derived.  He boasted to me, with a low
chuckling laugh, that most men, in respect to himself, wore windows
in their bosoms, and was wont to follow up such assertions by direct
and very startling proofs of his intimate knowledge of my own.  His
manner at these moments was frigid and abstract; his eyes were vacant
in expression; while his voice, usually a rich tenor, rose into a
treble which would have sounded petulant but for the deliberateness
and entire distinctness of the enunciation.  Observing him in these
moods, I often dwelt meditatively upon the old philosophy of the
Bi-Part Soul, and amused myself with the fancy of a double Dupin--the
creative and the resolvent.

Let it not be supposed, from what I have just said, that I am
detailing any mystery, or penning any romance.  What I have described
in the Frenchman was merely the result of an excited, or perhaps of a
diseased, intelligence.  But of the character of his remarks at the
periods in question an example will best convey the idea.

We were strolling one night down a long dirty street, in the vicinity
of the Palais Royal.  Being both, apparently, occupied with thought,
neither of us had spoken a syllable for fifteen minutes at least.
All at once Dupin broke forth with these words:

"He is a very little fellow, that's true, and would do better for the
Theatre Vari√©t√©s."

"There can be no doubt of that," I replied, unwittingly, and not at
first observing (so much had I been absorbed in reflection) the
extraordinary manner in which the speaker had chimed in with my
meditations.  In an instant afterward I recollected myself, and my
astonishment was profound.

"Dupin," said I, gravely, "this is beyond my comprehension.  I do not
hesitate to say that I am amazed, and can scarcely credit my senses.
How was it possible you should know that I was thinking of--?"  Here
I paused, to ascertain beyond a doubt whether he really knew of whom
I thought.

"---- of Chantilly," said he, "why do you pause?  You were remarking
to yourself that his diminutive figure unfitted him for tragedy."

This was precisely what had formed the subject of my reflections.
Chantilly was a quondam cobbler of the Rue St. Dennis, who, becoming
stage-mad, had attempted the r√¥le of Xerxes, in Cr√©billon's tragedy
so called, and been notoriously Pasquinaded for his pains.

"Tell me, for Heaven's sake," I exclaimed, "the method--if method
there is--by which you have been enabled to fathom my soul in this
matter."  In fact, I was even more startled than I would have been
willing to express.

"It was the fruiterer," replied my friend, "who brought you to the
conclusion that the mender of soles was not of sufficient height for
Xerxes _et id genus omne_."

"The fruiterer!--you astonish me--I know no fruiterer whomsoever."

"The man who ran up against you as we entered the street--it may have
been fifteen minutes ago."

I now remembered that, in fact, a fruiterer, carrying upon his head a
large basket of apples, had nearly thrown me down, by accident, as we
passed from the Rue C---- into the thoroughfare where we stood; but
what this had to do with Chantilly I could not possibly understand.

There was not a particle of charlat√¢nerie about Dupin.  "I will
explain," he said, "and that you may comprehend all clearly, we will
first retrace the course of your meditations, from the moment in
which I spoke to you until that of the recontre with the fruiterer in
question.  The larger links of the chain run thus--Chantilly, Orion,
Dr. Nichols, Epicurus, Stereotomy, the street stones, the fruiterer."

There are few persons who have not, at some period of their lives,
amused themselves in retracing the steps by which particular
conclusions of their own minds have been attained.  The occupation is
often full of interest; and he who attempts it for the first time is
astonished by the apparently illimitable distance and incoherence
between the starting-point and the goal.  What, then, must have been
my amazement, when I heard the Frenchman speak what he had just
spoken, and when I could not help acknowledging that he had spoken
the truth.  He continued:

"We had been talking of horses, if I remember aright, just before
leaving the Rue C----.  This was the last subject we discussed.  As
we crossed into this street, a fruiterer, with a large basket upon
his head, brushing quickly past us, thrust you upon a pile of
paving-stones collected at a spot where the causeway is undergoing
repair.  You stepped upon one of the loose fragments, slipped,
slightly strained your ankle, appeared vexed or sulky, muttered a few
words, turned to look at the pile, and then proceeded in silence.  I
was not particularly attentive to what you did; but observation has
become with me, of late, a species of necessity.

"You kept your eyes upon the ground--glancing, with a petulant
expression, at the holes and ruts in the pavement (so that I saw you
were still thinking of the stones), until we reached the little alley
called Lamartine, which has been paved, by way of experiment, with
the overlapping and riveted blocks.  Here your countenance brightened
up, and, perceiving your lips move, I could not doubt that you
murmured the word 'stereotomy,' a term very affectedly applied to
this species of pavement.  I knew that you could not say to yourself
'stereotomy' without being brought to think of atomies, and thus of
the theories of Epicurus; and since, when we discussed this subject
not very long ago, I mentioned to you how singularly, yet with how
little notice, the vague guesses of that noble Greek had met with
confirmation in the late nebular cosmogony, I felt that you could not
avoid casting your eyes upward to the great nebula in Orion, and I
certainly expected that you would do so.  You did look up; and I was
now assured that I had correctly followed your steps.  But in that
bitter tirade upon Chantilly, which appeared in yesterday's 'Mus√©e,'
the satirist, making some disgraceful allusions to the cobbler's
change of name upon assuming the buskin, quoted a Latin line about
which we have often conversed.  I mean the line

  Perdidit antiquum litera prima sonum.

I had told you that this was in reference to Orion, formerly written
Urion; and, from certain pungencies connected with this explanation,
I was aware that you could not have forgotten it.  It was clear,
therefore, that you would not fail to combine the two ideas of Orion
and Chantilly.  That you did combine them I saw by the character of
the smile which passed over your lips.  You thought of the poor
cobbler's immolation.  So far, you had been stooping in your gait;
but now I saw you draw yourself up to your full height.  I was then
sure that you reflected upon the diminutive figure of Chantilly.  At
this point I interrupted your meditations to remark that as, in fact,
he was a very little fellow--that Chantilly--he would do better at
the Th√©√¢tre des Vari√©t√©s."

Not long after this, we were looking over an evening edition of the
"Gazette des Tribunaux," when the following paragraphs arrested our
attention.

"_Extraordinary Murder_.--This morning, about three o'clock, the
inhabitants of the Quartier St. Roch were roused from sleep by a
succession of terrific shrieks, issuing, apparently, from the fourth
story of a house in the Rue Morgue, known to be in the sole occupancy
of one Madame L'Espanaye, and her daughter, Mademoiselle Camille
L'Espanaye.  After some delay, occasioned by a fruitless attempt to
procure admission in the usual manner, the gateway was broken in with
a crowbar, and eight or ten of the neighbors entered, accompanied by
two gendarmes.  By this time the cries had ceased; but, as the party
rushed up the first flight of stairs, two or more rough voices, in
angry contention, were distinguished, and seemed to proceed from the
upper part of the house.  As the second landing was reached, these
sounds, also, had ceased, and everything remained perfectly quiet.
The party spread themselves, and hurried from room to room.  Upon
arriving at a large back chamber in the fourth story (the door of
which, being found locked; with the key inside, was forced open), a
spectacle presented itself which struck every one present not less
with horror than with astonishment.

"The apartment was in the wildest disorder--the furniture broken and
thrown about in all directions.  There was only one bedstead; and
from this the bed had been removed, and thrown into the middle of the
floor.  On a chair lay a razor, besmeared with blood.  On the hearth
were two or three long and thick tresses of gray human hair, also
dabbled with blood, and seeming to have been pulled out by the roots.
Upon the floor were found four Napoleons, an ear-ring of topaz, three
large silver spoons, three smaller of metal d'Alger, and two bags,
containing nearly four thousand francs in gold.  The drawers of a
bureau, which stood in one corner, were open, and had been,
apparently, rifled, although many articles still remained in them.  A
small iron safe was discovered under the bed (not under the
bedstead).  It was open, with the key still in the door.  It had no
contents beyond a few old letters, and other papers of little
consequence.

"Of Madame L'Espanaye no traces were here seen; but an unusual
quantity of soot being observed in the fireplace, a search was made
in the chimney, and (horrible to relate!) the corpse of the daughter,
head downward, was dragged therefrom; it having been thus forced up
the narrow aperture for a considerable distance.  The body was quite
warm.  Upon examining it, many excoriations were perceived, no doubt
occasioned by the violence with which it had been thrust up and
disengaged.  Upon the face were many severe scratches, and, upon the
throat, dark bruises, and deep indentations of finger nails, as if
the deceased had been throttled to death.

"After a thorough investigation of every portion of the house without
further discovery, the party made its way into a small paved yard in
the rear of the building, where lay the corpse of the old lady, with
her throat so entirely cut that, upon an attempt to raise her, the
head fell off.  The body, as well as the head, was fearfully
mutilated--the former so much so as scarcely to retain any semblance
of humanity.

"To this horrible mystery there is not as yet, we believe, the
slightest clue."

The next day's paper had these additional particulars:

"_The Tragedy in the Rue Morgue_.--Many individuals have been
examined in relation to this most extraordinary and frightful affair"
[the word "affaire" has not yet, in France, that levity of import
which it conveys with us], "but nothing whatever has transpired to
throw light upon it.  We give below all the material testimony
elicited.

"_Pauline Dubourg_, laundress, deposes that she has known both the
deceased for three years, having washed for them during that period.
The old lady and her daughter seemed on good terms--very affectionate
toward each other.  They were excellent pay.  Could not speak in
regard to their mode or means of living.  Believed that Madame L.
told fortunes for a living.  Was reputed to have money put by.  Never
met any person in the house when she called for the clothes or took
them home.  Was sure that they had no servant in employ.  There
appeared to be no furniture in any part of the building except in the
fourth story.

"_Pierre Moreau_, tobacconist, deposes that he has been in the habit
of selling small quantities of tobacco and snuff to Madame L'Espanaye
for nearly four years.  Was born in the neighborhood, and has always
resided there.  The deceased and her daughter had occupied the house
in which the corpses were found for more than six years.  It was
formerly occupied by a jeweler, who under-let the upper rooms to
various persons.  The house was the property of Madame L.  She became
dissatisfied with the abuse of the premises by her tenant, and moved
into them herself, refusing to let any portion.  The old lady was
childish.  Witness had seen the daughter some five or six times
during the six years.  The two lived an exceedingly retired
life--were reputed to have money.  Had heard it said among the
neighbors that Madame L. told fortunes--did not believe it.  Had
never seen any person enter the door except the old lady and her
daughter, a porter once or twice, and a physician some eight or ten
times.

"Many other persons, neighbors, gave evidence to the same effect.  No
one was spoken of as frequenting the house.  It was not known whether
there were any living connections of Madame L. and her daughter.  The
shutters of the front windows were seldom opened.  Those in the rear
were always closed, with the exception of the large back room, fourth
story.  The house was a good house--not very old.

"_Isidore Muset_, gendarme, deposes that he was called to the house
about three o'clock in the morning, and found some twenty or thirty
persons at the gateway, endeavoring to gain admittance.  Forced it
open, at length, with a bayonet--not with a crowbar.  Had but little
difficulty in getting it open, on account of its being a double or
folding gate, and bolted neither at bottom nor top.  The shrieks were
continued until the gate was forced--and then suddenly ceased.  They
seemed to be screams of some person (or persons) in great agony--were
loud and drawn out, not short and quick.  Witness led the way
upstairs.  Upon reaching the first landing, heard two voices in loud
and angry contention--the one a gruff voice, the other much
shriller--a very strange voice.  Could distinguish some words of the
former, which was that of a Frenchman.  Was positive that it was not
a woman's voice.  Could distinguish the words '_sacre_' and
'_diable_.'  The shrill voice was that of a foreigner.  Could not be
sure whether it was the voice of a man or of a woman.  Could not make
out what was said, but believed the language to be Spanish.  The
state of the room and of the bodies was described by this witness as
we described them yesterday.

"_Henri Duval_, a neighbor, and by trade a silversmith, deposes that
he was one of the party who first entered the house.  Corroborates
the testimony of Muset in general.  As soon as they forced an
entrance, they reclosed the door, to keep out the crowd, which
collected very fast, notwithstanding the lateness of the hour.  The
shrill voice, this witness thinks, was that of an Italian.  Was
certain it was not French.  Could not be sure that it was a man's
voice.  It might have been a woman's.  Was not acquainted with the
Italian language.  Could not distinguish the words, but was convinced
by the intonation that the speaker was an Italian.  Knew Madame L.
and her daughter.  Had conversed with both frequently.  Was sure that
the shrill voice was not that of either of the deceased.

"---- _Odenheimer, restaurateur_.--This witness volunteered his
testimony.  Not speaking French, was examined through an interpreter.
Is a native of Amsterdam.  Was passing the house at the time of the
shrieks.  They lasted for several minutes--probably ten.  They were
long and loud--very awful and distressing.  Was one of those who
entered the building.  Corroborated the previous evidence in every
respect but one.  Was sure that the shrill voice was that of a
man--of a Frenchman.  Could not distinguish the words uttered.  They
were loud and quick--unequal--spoken apparently in fear as well as in
anger.  The voice was harsh--not so much shrill as harsh.  Could not
call it a shrill voice.  The gruff voice said repeatedly, '_sacre_,'
'_diable_,' and once '_mon Dieu_.'

"_Jules Mignaud_, banker, of the firm of Mignaud et Fils, Rue
Deloraine.  Is the elder Mignaud.  Madame L'Espanaye had some
property.  Had opened an account with his banking house in the spring
of the year--(eight years previously).  Made frequent deposits in
small sums.  Had checked for nothing until the third day before her
death, when she took out in person the sum of 4,000 francs.  This sum
was paid in gold, and a clerk sent home with the money.

"_Adolphe Le Bon_, clerk to Mignaud et Fils, deposes that on the day
in question, about noon, he accompanied Madame L'Espanaye to her
residence with the 4,000 francs, put up in two bags.  Upon the door
being opened, Mademoiselle L. appeared and took from his hands one of
the bags, while the old lady relieved him of the other.  He then
bowed and departed.  Did not see any person in the street at the
time.  It is a by-street--very lonely.

"_William Bird_, tailor, deposes that he was one of the party who
entered the house.  Is an Englishman.  Has lived in Paris two years.
Was one of the first to ascend the stairs.  Heard the voices in
contention.  The gruff voice was that of a Frenchman.  Could make out
several words, but can not now remember all.  Heard distinctly
'_sacre_' and '_mon Dieu_.'  There was a sound at the moment as if of
several persons struggling--a scraping and scuffling sound.  The
shrill voice was very loud--louder than the gruff one.  Is sure that
it was not the voice of an Englishman.  Appeared to be that of a
German.  Might have been a woman's voice.  Does not understand German.

"Four of the above-named witnesses being recalled, deposed that the
door of the chamber in which was found the body of Mademoiselle L.
was locked on the inside when the party reached it.  Everything was
perfectly silent--no groans or noises of any kind.  Upon forcing the
door no person was seen.  The windows, both of the back and front
room, were down and firmly fastened from within.  A door between the
two rooms was closed but not locked.  The door leading from the front
room into the passage was locked, with the key on the inside.  A
small room in the front of the house, on the fourth story, at the
head of the passage, was open, the door being ajar.  This room was
crowded with old beds, boxes, and so forth.  These were carefully
removed and searched.  There was not an inch of any portion of the
house which was not carefully searched.  Sweeps were sent up and down
the chimneys.  The house was a four-story one, with garrets
(_mansardes_).  A trap-door on the roof was nailed down very
securely--did not appear to have been opened for years.  The time
elapsing between the hearing of the voices in contention and the
breaking open of the room door was variously stated by the witnesses.
Some made it as short as three minutes--some as long as five.  The
door was opened with difficulty.

"_Alfonzo Garco_, undertaker, deposes that he resides in the Rue
Morgue.  Is a native of Spain.  Was one of the party who entered the
house.  Did not proceed upstairs.  Is nervous, and was apprehensive
of the consequences of agitation.  Heard the voices in contention.
The gruff voice was that of a Frenchman.  Could not distinguish what
was said.  The shrill voice was that of an Englishman--is sure of
this.  Does not understand the English language, but judges by the
intonation.

"_Alfonzo Garcio_, undertaker, deposes that he was among the first to
ascend the stairs.  Heard the voices in question.  The gruff voice
was that of a Frenchman.  Distinguished several words.  The speaker
appeared to be expostulating.  Could not make out the words of the
shrill voice.  Spoke quick and unevenly.  Thinks it the voice of a
Russian.  Corroborates the general testimony.  Is an Italian.  Never
conversed with a native of Russia.

"Several witness, recalled, here testified that the chimneys of all
the rooms on the fourth story were too narrow to admit the passage of
a human being.  By 'sweeps,' were meant cylindrical sweeping-brushes,
such as are employed by those who clean chimneys.  These brushes were
passed up and down every flue in the house.  There is no back passage
by which any one could have descended while the party proceeded
upstairs.  The body of Mademoiselle L'Espanaye was so firmly wedged
in the chimney that it could not be got down until four or five of
the party united their strength.

"_Paul Dumas_, physician, deposes that he was called to view the
bodies about daybreak.  They were both then lying on the sacking of
the bedstead in the chamber where Mademoiselle L. was found.  The
corpse of the young lady was much bruised and excoriated.  The fact
that it had been thrust up the chimney would sufficiently account for
these appearances.  The throat was greatly chafed.  There were
several deep scratches just below the chin, together with a series of
livid spots which were evidently the impression of fingers.  The face
was fearfully discolored, and the eyeballs protruded.  The tongue had
been partially bitten through.  A large bruise was discovered upon
the pit of the stomach, produced, apparently, by the pressure of a
knee.  In the opinion of M. Dumas, Mademoiselle L'Espanaye had been
throttled to death by some person or persons unknown.  The corpse of
the mother was horribly mutilated.  All the bones of the right leg
and arm were more or less shattered.  The left tibia much splintered,
as well as all the ribs of the left side.  Whole body dreadfully
bruised and discolored.  It was not possible to say how the injuries
had been inflicted.  A heavy club of wood, or a broad bar of iron--a
chair--any large, heavy, and obtuse weapon would have produced such
results, if wielded by the hands of a very powerful man.  No woman
could have inflicted the blows with any weapon.  The head of the
deceased, when seen by witness, was entirely separated from the body,
and was also greatly shattered.  The throat had evidently been cut
with some very sharp instrument--probably with a razor.

"_Alexandre Etienne_, surgeon, was called with M. Dumas to view the
bodies.  Corroborated the testimony, and the opinions of M. Dumas.

"Nothing further of importance was elicited, although several other
persons were examined.  A murder so mysterious, and so perplexing in
all its particulars, was never before committed in Paris--if indeed a
murder has been committed at all.  The police are entirely at
fault--an unusual occurrence in affairs of this nature.  There is
not, however, the shadow of a clue apparent."

The evening edition of the paper stated that the greatest excitement
still continued in the Quartier St. Roch--that the premises in
question had been carefully researched, and fresh examinations of
witnesses instituted, but all to no purpose.  A postscript, however,
mentioned that Adolphe Le Bon had been arrested and
imprisoned--although nothing appeared to criminate him beyond the
facts already detailed.

Dupin seemed singularly interested in the progress of this affair--at
least so I judged from his manner, for he made no comments.  It was
only after the announcement that Le Bon had been imprisoned, that he
asked me my opinion respecting the murders.

I could merely agree with all Paris in considering them an insoluble
mystery.  I saw no means by which it would be possible to trace the
murderer.

"We must not judge of the means," said Dupin, "by this shell of an
examination.  The Parisian police, so much extolled for acumen, are
cunning, but no more.  There is no method in their proceedings,
beyond the method of the moment.  They make a vast parade of
measures; but, not infrequently, these are so ill-adapted to the
objects proposed, as to put us in mind of Monsieur Jourdain's calling
for his robe-de-chambre--_pour mieux entendre la musique_.  The
results attained by them are not infrequently surprising, but, for
the most part, are brought about by simple diligence and activity.
When these qualities are unavailing, their schemes fail.  Vidocq, for
example, was a good guesser, and a persevering man.  But, without
educated thought, he erred continually by the very intensity at his
investigations.  He impaired his vision by holding the object too
close.  He might see, perhaps, one or two points with unusual
clearness, but in so doing he, necessarily, lost sight of the matter
as a whole.  Thus there is such a thing as being too profound.  Truth
is not always in a well.  In fact, as regards the more important
knowledge, I do believe that she is invariably superficial.  The
depth lies in the valleys where we seek her, and not upon the
mountain-tops where she is found.  The modes and sources of this kind
of error are well typified in the contemplation of the heavenly
bodies.  To look at a star by glances--to view it in a sidelong way,
by turning toward it the exterior portions of the retina (more
susceptible of feeble impressions of light than the interior), is to
behold the star distinctly--is to have the best appreciation of its
lustre--a lustre which grows dim just in proportion as we turn our
vision fully upon it.  A greater number of rays actually fall upon
the eye in the latter case, but in the former, there is the more
refined capacity for comprehension.  By undue profundity we perplex
and enfeeble thought; and it is possible to make even Venus herself
vanish from the firmament by a scrutiny too sustained, too
concentrated, or too direct.

"As for these murders, let us enter into some examinations for
ourselves, before we make up an opinion respecting them.  An inquiry
will afford us amusement" [I thought this an odd term, so applied,
but said nothing], "and besides, Le Bon once rendered me a service
for which I am not ungrateful.  We will go and see the premises with
our own eyes.  I know G----, the Prefect of Police, and shall have no
difficulty in obtaining the necessary permission."

The permission was obtained, and we proceeded at once to the Rue
Morgue.  This is one of those miserable thoroughfares which intervene
between the Rue Richelieu and the Rue St. Roch.  It was late in the
afternoon when we reached it, as this quarter is at a great distance
from that in which we resided.  The house was readily found; for
there were still many persons gazing up at the closed shutters, with
an objectless curiosity, from the opposite side of the way.  It was
an ordinary Parisian house, with a gateway, on one side of which was
a glazed watch-box, with a sliding panel in the window, indicating a
loge de concierge.  Before going in we walked up the street, turned
down an alley, and then, again turning, passed in the rear of the
building--Dupin, meanwhile, examining the whole neighborhood, as well
as the house, with a minuteness of attention for which I could see no
possible object.

Retracing our steps we came again to the front of the dwelling, rang,
and, having shown our credentials, were admitted by the agents in
charge.  We went upstairs--into the chamber where the body of
Mademoiselle L'Espanaye had been found, and where both the deceased
still lay.  The disorders of the room had, as usual, been suffered to
exist.  I saw nothing beyond what had been stated in the "Gazette des
Tribunaux."  Dupin scrutinized everything--not excepting the bodies
of the victims.  We then went into the other rooms, and into the
yard; a gendarme accompanying us throughout.  The examination
occupied us until dark, when we took our departure.  On our way home
my companion stepped in for a moment at the office of one of the
daily papers.

I have said that the whims of my friend were manifold, and that _Je
les menagais_:--for this phrase there is no English equivalent.  It
was his humor, now, to decline all conversation on the subject of the
murder, until about noon the next day.  He then asked me, suddenly,
if I had observed anything peculiar at the scene of the atrocity.

There was something in his manner of emphasizing the word "peculiar,"
which caused me to shudder, without knowing why.

"No, nothing peculiar," I said; "nothing more, at least, than we both
saw stated in the paper."

"The 'Gazette'," he replied, "has not entered, I fear, into the
unusual horror of the thing.  But dismiss the idle opinions of this
print.  It appears to me that this mystery is considered insoluble,
for the very reason which should cause it to be regarded as easy of
solution--I mean for the _outre_ character of its features.  The
police are confounded by the seeming absence of motive--not for the
murder itself--but for the atrocity of the murder.  They are puzzled,
too, by the seeming impossibility of reconciling the voices heard in
contention, with the facts that no one was discovered upstairs but
the assassinated Mademoiselle L'Espanaye, and that there were no
means of egress without the notice of the party ascending.  The wild
disorder of the room; the corpse thrust, with the head downward, up
the chimney; the frightful mutilation of the body of the old lady;
these considerations, with those just mentioned, and others which I
need not mention, have sufficed to paralyze the powers, by putting
completely at fault the boasted acumen, of the government agents.
They have fallen into the gross but common error of confounding the
unusual with the abstruse.  But it is by these deviations from the
plane of the ordinary, that reason feels its way, if at all, in its
search for the true.  In investigations such as we are now pursuing,
it should not be so much asked 'what has occurred?' as 'what has
occurred that has never occurred before?'  In fact, the facility with
which I shall arrive, or have arrived, at the solution of this
mystery, is in the direct ratio of its apparent insolubility in the
eyes of the police."

I stared at the speaker in mute astonishment.

"I am now awaiting," continued he, looking toward the door of our
apartment--"I am now awaiting a person who, although perhaps not the
perpetrator of these butcheries, must have been in some measure
implicated in their perpetration.  Of the worst portion of the crimes
committed, it is probable that he is innocent.  I hope that I am
right in this supposition; for upon it I build my expectation of
reading the entire riddle.  I look for the man here--in this
room--every moment.  It is true that he may not arrive; but the
probability is that he will.  Should he come, it will be necessary to
detain him.  Here are pistols; and we both know how to use them when
occasion demands their use."

I took the pistols, scarcely knowing what I did, or believing what I
heard, while Dupin went on, very much as if in a soliloquy.  I have
already spoken of his abstract manner at such times.  His discourse
was addressed to myself; but his voice, although by no means loud,
had that intonation which is commonly employed in speaking to some
one at a great distance.  His eyes, vacant in expression, regarded
only the wall.

"That the voices heard in contention," he said, "by the party upon
the stairs, were not the voices of the women themselves, was fully
proved by the evidence.  This relieves us of all doubt upon the
question whether the old lady could have first destroyed the
daughter, and afterward have committed suicide.  I speak of this
point chiefly for the sake of method; for the strength of Madame
L'Espanaye would have been utterly unequal to the task of thrusting
her daughter's corpse up the chimney as it was found; and the nature
of the wounds upon her own person entirely precludes the idea of
self-destruction.  Murder, then, has been committed by some third
party; and the voices of this third party were those heard in
contention.  Let me now advert--not to the whole testimony respecting
these voices--but to what was peculiar in that testimony.  Did you
observe anything peculiar about it?"

I remarked that, while all the witnesses agreed in supposing the
gruff voice to be that of a Frenchman, there was much disagreement in
regard to the shrill, or, as one individual termed it, the harsh
voice.

"That was the evidence itself," said Dupin, "but it was not the
peculiarity of the evidence.  You have observed nothing distinctive.
Yet there was something to be observed.  The witnesses, as you
remark, agreed about the gruff voice; they were here unanimous.  But
in regard to the shrill voice, the peculiarity is--not that they
disagreed--but that, while an Italian, an Englishman, a Spaniard, a
Hollander, and a Frenchman attempted to describe it, each one spoke
of it as that of a foreigner.  Each is sure that it was not the voice
of one of his own countrymen.  Each likens it--not to the voice of an
individual of any nation with whose language he is conversant--but
the converse.  The Frenchman supposes it the voice of a Spaniard, and
'might have distinguished some words had he been acquainted with the
Spanish.'  The Dutchman maintains it to have been that of a
Frenchman; but we find it stated that 'not understanding French this
witness was examined through an interpreter.'  The Englishman thinks
it the voice of a German, and 'does not understand German.'  The
Spaniard 'is sure' that it was that of an Englishman, but 'judges by
the intonation' altogether, 'as he has no knowledge of the English.'
The Italian believes it the voice of a Russian, but 'has never
conversed with a native of Russia.'  A second Frenchman differs,
moreover, with the first, and is positive that the voice was that of
an Italian; but, not being cognizant of that tongue, is, like the
Spaniard, 'convinced by the intonation.'  Now, how strangely unusual
must that voice have really been, about which such testimony as this
could have been elicited!--in whose tones, even, denizens of the five
great divisions of Europe could recognize nothing familiar!  You will
say that it might have been the voice of an Asiatic--of an African.
Neither Asiatics nor Africans abound in Paris; but, without denying
the inference, I will now merely call your attention to three points.
The voice is termed by one witness 'harsh rather than shrill.'  It is
represented by two others to have been 'quick and unequal.'  No
words--no sounds resembling words--were by any witness mentioned as
distinguishable.

"I know not," continued Dupin, "what impression I may have made, so
far, upon your own understanding; but I do not hesitate to say that
legitimate deductions even from this portion of the testimony--the
portion respecting the gruff and shrill voices--are in themselves
sufficient to engender a suspicion which should give direction to all
further progress in the investigation of the mystery.  I said
'legitimate deductions'; but my meaning is not thus fully expressed.
I designed to imply that the deductions are the sole proper ones, and
that the suspicion arises inevitably from them as the single result.
What the suspicion is, however, I will not say just yet.  I merely
wish you to bear in mind that, with myself, it was sufficiently
forcible to give a definite form--a certain tendency--to my inquiries
in the chamber.

"Let us now transport ourselves, in fancy, to this chamber.  What
shall we first seek here?  The means of egress employed by the
murderers.  It is not too much to say that neither of us believes in
preternatural events.  Madame and Mademoiselle L'Espanaye were not
destroyed by spirits.  The doers of the deed were material and
escaped materially.  Then how?  Fortunately there is but one mode of
reasoning upon the point, and that mode must lead us to a definite
decision.  Let us examine, each by each, the possible means of
egress.  It is clear that the assassins were in the room where
Mademoiselle L'Espanaye was found, or at least in the room adjoining,
when the party ascended the stairs.  It is, then, only from these two
apartments that we have to seek issues.  The police have laid bare
the floors, the ceiling, and the masonry of the walls, in every
direction.  No secret issues could have escaped their vigilance.
But, not trusting to their eyes, I examined with my own.  There were,
then, no secret issues.  Both doors leading from the rooms into the
passage were securely locked, with the keys inside.  Let us turn to
the chimneys.  These, although of ordinary width for some eight or
ten feet above the hearths, will not admit, throughout their extent,
the body of a large cat.  The impossibility of egress, by means
already stated, being thus absolute, we are reduced to the windows.
Through those of the front room no one could have escaped without
notice from the crowd in the street.  The murderers must have passed,
then, through those of the back room.  Now, brought to this
conclusion in so unequivocal a manner as we are, it is not our part,
as reasoners, to reject it on account of apparent impossibilities.
It is only left for us to prove that these apparent 'impossibilities'
are, in reality, not such.

"There are two windows in the chamber.  One of them is unobstructed
by furniture, and is wholly visible.  The lower portion of the other
is hidden from view by the head of the unwieldy bedstead which is
thrust close up against it.  The former was found securely fastened
from within.  It resisted the utmost force of those who endeavored to
raise it.  A large gimlet-hole had been pierced in its frame to the
left, and a very stout nail was found fitted therein, nearly to the
head.  Upon examining the other window, a similar nail was seen
similarly fitted in it; and a vigorous attempt to raise this sash
failed also.  The police were now entirely satisfied that egress had
not been in these directions.  And, therefore, it was thought a
matter of supererogation to withdraw the nails and open the windows.

"My own examination was somewhat more particular, and was so for the
reason I have just given--because here it was, I knew, that all
apparent impossibilities must be proved to be not such in reality.

"I proceeded to think thus--_a posteriori_.  The murderers did escape
from one of these windows.  This being so, they could not have
refastened the sashes from the inside, as they were found
fastened;--the consideration which put a stop, through its
obviousness, to the scrutiny of the police in this quarter.  Yet the
sashes were fastened.  They must, then, have the power of fastening
themselves.  There was no escape from this conclusion.  I stepped to
the unobstructed casement, withdrew the nail with some difficulty,
and attempted to raise the sash.  It resisted all my efforts, as I
had anticipated.  A concealed spring must, I now knew, exist; and
this corroboration of my idea convinced me that my premises, at
least, were correct, however mysterious still appeared the
circumstances attending the nails.  A careful search soon brought to
light the hidden spring.  I pressed it, and, satisfied with the
discovery, forbore to upraise the sash.

"I now replaced the nail and regarded it attentively.  A person
passing out through this window might have reclosed it, and the
spring would have caught--but the nail could not have been replaced.
The conclusion was plain, and again narrowed in the field of my
investigations.  The assassins must have escaped through the other
window.  Supposing, then, the springs upon each sash to be the same,
as was probable, there must be found a difference between the nails,
or at least between the modes of their fixture.  Getting upon the
sacking of the bedstead, I looked over the head-board minutely at the
second casement.  Passing my hand down behind the board, I readily
discovered and pressed the spring, which was, as I had supposed,
identical in character with its neighbor.  I now looked at the nail.
It was as stout as the other, and apparently fitted in the same
manner--driven in nearly up to the head.

"You will say that I was puzzled; but, if you think so, you must have
misunderstood the nature of the inductions.  To use a sporting
phrase, I had not been once 'at fault.'  The scent had never for an
instant been lost.  There was no flaw in any link of the chain.  I
had traced the secret to its ultimate result--and that result was the
nail.  It had, I say, in every respect, the appearance of its fellow
in the other window; but this fact was an absolute nullity
(conclusive as it might seem to be) when compared with the
consideration that here, at this point, teminated the clue.  'There
must be something wrong,' I said, 'about the nail.'  I touched it;
and the head, with about a quarter of an inch of the shank, came off
in my fingers.  The rest of the shank was in the gimlet-hole, where
it had been broken off.  The fracture was an old one (for its edges
were incrusted with rust), and had apparently been accomplished by
the blow of a hammer, which had partially embedded, in the top of the
bottom sash, the head portion of the nail.  I now carefully replaced
this head portion in the indentation whence I had taken it, and the
resemblance to a perfect nail was complete--the fissure was
invisible.  Pressing the spring, I gently raised the sash for a few
inches; the head went up with it, remaining firm in its bed.  I
closed the window, and the semblance of the whole nail was again
perfect.

"This riddle, so far, was now unriddled.  The assassin had escaped
through the window which looked upon the bed.  Dropping of its own
accord upon his exit (or perhaps purposely closed), it had become
fastened by the spring; and it was the retention of this spring which
had been mistaken by the police for that of the nail--further inquiry
being thus considered unnecessary.

"The next question is that of the mode of descent.  Upon this point I
had been satisfied in my walk with you around the building.  About
five feet and a half from the casement in question there runs a
lightning-rod.  From this rod it would have been impossible for any
one to reach the window itself, to say nothing of entering it.  I
observed, however, that the shutters of the fourth story were of the
peculiar kind called by Parisian carpenters ferrades--a kind rarely
employed at the present day, but frequently seen upon very old
mansions at Lyons and Bordeaux.  They are in the form of an ordinary
door (a single, not a folding door), except that the lower half is
latticed or worked in open trellis--thus affording an excellent hold
for the hands.  In the present instance these shutters are fully
three feet and a half broad.  When we saw them from the rear of the
house, they were both about half open--that is to say, they stood off
at right angles from the wall.  It is probable that the police, as
well as myself, examined the back of the tenement; but, if so, in
looking at these ferrades in the line of their breadth (as they must
have done), they did not perceive this great breadth itself, or, at
all events, failed to take it into due consideration.  In fact,
having once satisfied themselves that no egress could have been made
in this quarter, they would naturally bestow here a very cursory
examination.  It was clear to me, however, that the shutter belonging
to the window at the head of the bed would, if swung fully back to
the wall, reach to within two feet of the lightning-rod.  It was also
evident that, by exertion of a very unusual degree of activity and
courage, an entrance into the window, from the rod, might have been
thus effected.  By reaching to the distance of two feet and a half
(we now suppose the shutter open to its whole extent) a robber might
have taken a firm grasp upon the trellis-work.  Letting go, then, his
hold upon the rod, placing his feet securely against the wall, and
springing boldly from it, he might have swung the shutter so as to
close it, and, if we imagine the window open at the time, might even
have swung himself into the room.

"I wish you to bear especially in mind that I have spoken of a very
unusual degree of activity as requisite to success in so hazardous
and so difficult a feat.  It is my design to show you, first, that
the thing might possibly have been accomplished:--but, secondly and
chiefly, I wish to impress upon your understanding the very
extraordinary--the almost preternatural character of that agility
which could have accomplished it.

"You will say, no doubt, using the language of the law, that 'to make
out my case,' I should rather undervalue than insist upon a full
estimation of the activity required in this matter.  This may be the
practise in law, but it is not the usage of reason.  My ultimate
object is only the truth.  My immediate purpose is to lead you to
place in juxtaposition, that very unusual activity of which I have
just spoken, with that very peculiar shrill (or harsh) and unequal
voice, about whose nationality no two persons could be found to
agree, and in whose utterance no syllabification could be detected."

At these words a vague and half-formed conception of the meaning of
Dupin flitted over my mind.  I seemed to be upon the verge of
comprehension, without power to comprehend--as men, at times, find
themselves upon the brink of remembrance, without being able, in the
end, to remember.  My friend went on with his discourse.

"You will see," he said, "that I have shifted the question from the
mode of egress to that of ingress.  It was my design to convey the
idea that both were effected in the same manner, at the same point.
Let us now revert to the interior of the room.  Let us survey the
appearances here.  The drawers of the bureau, it is said, had been
rifled, although many articles of apparel still remained within them.
The conclusion here is absurd.  It is a mere guess--a very silly
one--and no more.  How are we to know that the articles found in the
drawers were not all these drawers had originally contained?  Madame
L'Espanaye and her daughter lived an exceedingly retired life--saw no
company--seldom went out--had little use for numerous changes of
habiliment.  Those found were at least of as good quality as any
likely to be possessed by these ladies.  If a thief had taken any,
why did he not take the best--why did he not take all?  In a word,
why did he abandon four thousand francs in gold to encumber himself
with a bundle of linen?  The gold was abandoned.  Nearly the whole
sum mentioned by Monsieur Mignaud, the banker, was discovered, in
bags, upon the floor.  I wish you, therefore, to discard from your
thoughts the blundering idea of motive, engendered in the brains of
the police by that portion of the evidence which speaks of money
delivered at the door of the house.  Coincidences ten times as
remarkable as this (the delivery of the money, and murder committed
within three days upon the party receiving it), happen to all of us
every hour of our lives, without attracting even momentary notice.
Coincidences, in general, are great stumbling-blocks in the way of
that class of thinkers who have been educated to know nothing of the
theory of probabilities--that theory to which the most glorious
objects of human research are indebted for the most glorious of
illustration.  In the present instance, had the gold been gone, the
fact of its delivery three days before would have formed something
more than a coincidence.  It would have been corroborative of this
idea of motive.  But, under the real circumstances of the case, if we
are to suppose gold the motive of this outrage, we must also imagine
the perpetrator so vacillating an idiot as to have abandoned his gold
and his motive together.

"Keeping now steadily in mind the points to which I have drawn your
attention--that peculiar voice, that unusual agility, and that
startling absence of motive in a murder so singularly atrocious as
this--let us glance at the butchery itself.  Here is a woman
strangled to death by manual strength, and thrust up a chimney head
downward.  Ordinary assassins employ no such mode of murder as this.
Least of all do they thus dispose of the murdered.  In the manner of
thrusting the corpse up the chimney, you will admit that there was
something excessively outre--something altogether irreconcilable with
our common notions of human action, even when we suppose the actors
the most depraved of men.  Think, too, how great must have been that
strength which could have thrust the body up such an aperture so
forcibly that the united vigor of several persons was found barely
sufficient to drag it down!

"Turn, now, to other indications of the employment of a vigor most
marvelous.  On the hearth were thick tresses--very thick tresses--of
gray human hair.  These had been torn out by the roots.  You are
aware of the great force necessary in tearing thus from the head even
twenty or thirty hairs together.  You saw the locks in question as
well as myself.  Their roots (a hideous sight!) were clotted with
fragments of the flesh of the scalp--sure token of the prodigious
power which had been exerted in uprooting perhaps half a million of
hairs at a time.  The throat of the old lady was not merely cut, but
the head absolutely severed from the body: the instrument was a mere
razor.  I wish you also to look at the brutal ferocity of these
deeds.  Of the bruises upon the body of Madame L'Espanaye I do not
speak.  Monsieur Dumas, and his worthy coadjutor Monsieur Etienne,
have pronounced that they were inflicted by some obtuse instrument;
and so far these gentlemen are very correct.  The obtuse instrument
was clearly the stone pavement in the yard, upon which the victim had
fallen from the window which looked in upon the bed.  This idea,
however simple it may now seem, escaped the police for the same
reason that the breadth of the shutters escaped them--because, by the
affair of the nails, their perceptions had been hermetically sealed
against the possibility of the windows having ever been opened at all.

"If now, in addition to all these things, you have properly reflected
upon the odd disorder of the chamber, we have gone so far as to
combine the ideas of an agility astounding, a strength superhuman, a
ferocity brutal, a butchery without motive, a grotesquerie in horror
absolutely alien from humanity, and a voice foreign in tone to the
ears of men of many nations, and devoid of all distinct or
intelligible syllabification.  What result, then, has ensued?  What
impression have I made upon your fancy?"

I felt a creeping of the flesh as Dupin asked me the question.  "A
madman," I said, "has done this deed--some raving maniac, escaped
from a neighboring Maison de Sant√©."

"In some respects," he replied, "your idea is not irrelevant.  But
the voices of madmen, even in their wildest paroxysms, are never
found to tally with that peculiar voice heard upon the stairs.
Madmen are of some nation, and their language, however incoherent in
its words, has always the coherence of syllabification.  Besides, the
hair of a madman is not such as I now hold in my hand.  I
disentangled this little tuft from the rigidly clutched fingers of
Madame L'Espanaye.  Tell me what you can make of it."

"Dupin!" I said, completely unnerved; "this hair is most
unusual--this is no human hair."

"I have not asserted that it is," said he; "but, before we decide
this point, I wish you to glance at the little sketch I have here
traced upon this paper.  It is a facsimile drawing of what has been
described in one portion of the testimony as 'dark bruises and deep
indentations of finger nails' upon the throat of Mademoiselle
L'Espanaye, and in another (by Messrs. Dumas and Etienne) as a
'series of livid spots, evidently the impression of fingers.'

"You will perceive," continued my friend, spreading out the paper
upon the table before us, "that this drawing gives the idea of a firm
and fixed hold.  There is no slipping apparent.  Each finger has
retained--possibly until the death of the victim--the fearful grasp
by which it originally embedded itself.  Attempt, now, to place all
your fingers, at the same time, in the respective impressions as you
see them."

I made the attempt in vain.

"We are possibly not giving this matter a fair trial," he said.  "The
paper is spread out upon a plane surface; but the human throat is
cylindrical.  Here is a billet of wood, the circumference of which is
about that of the throat.  Wrap the drawing around it, and try the
experiment again."

I did so; but the difficulty was even more obvious than before.
"This," I said, "is the mark of no human hand."

"Read now," replied Dupin, "this passage from Cuvier."

It was a minute anatomical and generally descriptive account of the
large fulvous Orang-Outang of the East Indian Islands.  The gigantic
stature, the prodigious strength and activity, the wild ferocity, and
the imitative propensities of these mammalia are sufficiently well
known to all.  I understood the full horrors of the murder at once.

"The description of the digits," said I, as I made an end of the
reading, "is in exact accordance with his drawing.  I see that no
animal but an Orang-Outang, of the species here mentioned, could have
impressed the indentations as you have traced them.  This tuft of
tawny hair, too, is identical in character with that of the beast of
Cuvier.  But I cannot possibly comprehend the particulars of this
frightful mystery.  Besides, there were two voices heard in
contention, and one of them was unquestionably the voice of a
Frenchman."

"True; and you will remember an expression attributed almost
unanimously, by the evidence, to this voice--the expression, '_mon
Dieu!_'  This, under the circumstances, has been justly characterized
by one of the witnesses (Montani, the confectioner) as an expression
of remonstrance or expostulation.  Upon these two words, therefore, I
have mainly built my hopes of a full solution of the riddle.  A
Frenchman was cognizant of the murder.  It is possible--indeed it is
far more than probable--that he was innocent of all participation in
the bloody transactions which took place.  The Orang-Outang may have
escaped from him.  He may have traced it to the chamber; but, under
the agitating circumstances which ensued, he could never have
recaptured it.  It is still at large.  I will not pursue these
guesses--for I have no right to call them more--since the shades of
reflection upon which they are based are scarcely of sufficient depth
to be appreciable by my own intellect, and since I could not pretend
to make them intelligible to the understanding of another.  We will
call them guesses, then, and speak of them as such.  If the Frenchman
in question is indeed, as I suppose, innocent of this atrocity, this
advertisement, which I left last night, upon our return home, at the
office of 'Le Monde' (a paper devoted to the shipping interest, and
much sought by sailors), will bring him to our residence."

He handed me a paper, and I read thus:


"CAUGHT--_In the Bois de Boulogne, early in the morning of the ----
inst._ (the morning of the murder), _a very large, tawny Orang-Outang
of the Bornese species.  The owner_ (_who is ascertained to be a
sailor, belonging to a Maltese vessel_) _may have the animal again,
upon identifying it satisfactorily, and paying a few charges arising
from its capture and keeping.  Call at No. ---- Rue ----, Faubourg
St. Germain--au troisieme._"


"How was it possible," I asked, "that you should know the man to be a
sailor, and belonging to a Maltese vessel?"

"I do not know it," said Dupin.  "I am not sure of it.  Here,
however, is a small piece of ribbon, which from its form, and from
its greasy appearance, has evidently been used in tying the hair in
one of those long queues of which sailors are so fond.  Moreover,
this knot is one which few besides sailors can tie, and it is
peculiar to the Maltese.  I picked the ribbon up at the foot of the
lightning-rod.  It could not have belonged to either of the deceased.
Now if, after all, I am wrong in my induction from this ribbon, that
the Frenchman was a sailor belonging to a Maltese vessel, still I can
have done no harm in saying what I did in the advertisement.  If I am
in error, he will merely suppose that I have been misled by some
circumstance into which he will not take the trouble to inquire.  But
if I am right, a great point is gained.  Cognizant although innocent
of the murder, the Frenchman will naturally hesitate about replying
to the advertisement--about demanding the Orang-Outang.  He will
reason thus:--'I am innocent; I am poor; my Orang-Outang is of great
value--to one in my circumstances a fortune of itself--why should I
lose it through idle apprehensions of danger?  Here it is, within my
grasp.  It was found in the Bois de Boulogne--at a vast distance from
the scene of that butchery.  How can it ever be suspected that a
brute beast should have done the deed?  The police are at fault--they
have failed to procure the slightest clue.  Should they even trace
the animal, it would be impossible to prove me cognizant of the
murder, or to implicate me in guilt on account of that cognizance.
Above all, I am known.  The advertiser designates me as the possessor
of the beast.  I am not sure to what limit his knowledge may extend.
Should I avoid claiming a property of so great value, which it is
known that I possess, it will render the animal at least liable to
suspicion.  It is not my policy to attract attention either to myself
or to the beast.  I will answer the advertisement, get the
Orang-Outang, and keep it close until this matter has blown over."

At this moment we heard a step upon the stairs.

"Be ready," said Dupin, "with your pistols, but neither use them nor
show them until at a signal from myself."

The front door of the house had been left open, and the visitor had
entered, without ringing, and advanced several steps upon the
staircase.  Now, however, he seemed to hesitate.  Presently we heard
him descending.  Dupin was moving quickly to the door, when we again
heard him coming up.  He did not turn back a second time, but stepped
up with decision, and rapped at the door of our chamber.

"Come in," said Dupin, in a cheerful and hearty tone.

A man entered.  He was a sailor, evidently--a tall, stout, and
muscular-looking person, with a certain dare-devil expression of
countenance, not altogether unprepossessing.  His face, greatly
sunburned, was more than half-hidden by whisker and mustachio.  He
had with him a huge oaken cudgel, but appeared to be otherwise
unarmed.  He bowed awkwardly, and bade us "good-evening," in French
accents, which, although somewhat Neufchatelish, were still
sufficiently indicative of a Parisian origin.

"Sit down, my friend," said Dupin.  "I suppose you have called about
the Orang-Outang.  Upon my word, I almost envy you the possession of
him; a remarkably fine, and no doubt a very valuable animal.  How old
do you suppose him to be?"

The sailor drew a long breath, with the air of a man relieved of some
intolerable burden, and then replied, in an assured tone:

"I have no way of telling--but he can't be more than four or five
years old.  Have you got him here?"

"Oh, no; we had no conveniences for keeping him here.  He is at a
livery stable in the Rue Dubourg, just by.  You can get him in the
morning.  Of course you are prepared to identify the property?"

"To be sure I am, sir."

"I shall be sorry to part with him," said Dupin.

"I don't mean that you should be at all this trouble for nothing,
sir," said the man.  "Couldn't expect it.  Am very willing to pay a
reward for the finding of the animal--that is to say, anything in
reason."

"Well," replied my friend, "that is all very fair, to be sure.  Let
me think!--what should I have?  Oh!  I will tell you.  My reward
shall be this.  You shall give me all the information in your power
about these murders in the Rue Morgue."

Dupin said the last words in a very low tone, and very quietly.  Just
as quietly, too, he walked toward the door, locked it, and put the
key in his pocket.  He then drew a pistol from his bosom and placed
it, without the least flurry, upon the table.

The sailor's face flushed up as if he were struggling with
suffocation.  He started to his feet and grasped his cudgel; but the
next moment he fell back into his seat, trembling violently, and with
the countenance of death itself.  He spoke not a word.  I pitied him
from the bottom of my heart.

"My friend," said Dupin, in a kind tone, "you are alarming yourself
unnecessarily--you are, indeed.  We mean you no harm whatever.  I
pledge you the honor of a gentleman, and of a Frenchman, that we
intend you no injury.  I perfectly well know that you are innocent of
the atrocities in the Rue Morgue.  It will not do, however, to deny
that you are in some measure implicated in them.  From what I have
already said, you must know that I have had means of information
about this matter--means of which you could never have dreamed.  Now,
the thing stands thus.  You have done nothing which you could have
avoided--nothing, certainly, which renders you culpable.  You were
not even guilty of robbery, when you might have robbed with impunity.
You have nothing to conceal.  You have no reason for concealment.  On
the other hand, you are bound by every principle of honor to confess
all you know.  An innocent man is now imprisoned, charged with that
crime of which you can point out the perpetrator."

The sailor had recovered his presence of mind, in a great measure,
while Dupin uttered these words; but his original boldness of bearing
was all gone.

"So help me God!" said he, after a brief pause, "I will tell you all
I know about this affair;--but I do not expect you to believe
one-half I say--I would be a fool indeed if I did.  Still, I am
innocent, and I will make a clean breast if I die for it."

What he stated was, in substance, this.  He had lately made a voyage
to the Indian Archipelago.  A party, of which he formed one, landed
at Borneo, and passed into the interior on an excursion of pleasure.
Himself and a companion had captured the Orang-Outang.  This
companion dying, the animal fell into his own exclusive possession.
After a great trouble, occasioned by the intractable ferocity of his
captive during the home voyage, he at length succeeded in lodging it
safely at his own residence in Paris, where, not to attract toward
himself the unpleasant curiosity of his neighbors, he kept it
carefully secluded, until such time as it should recover from a wound
in the foot, received from a splinter on board ship.  His ultimate
design was to sell it.

Returning home from some sailor's frolic on the night, or rather in
the morning, of the murder, he found the beast occupying his own
bedroom, into which it had broken from a closet adjoining, where it
had been, as was thought, securely confined.  Razor in hand, and
fully lathered, it was sitting before a looking-glass, attempting the
operation of shaving, in which it had no doubt previously watched its
master through the keyhole of the closet.  Terrified at the sight of
so dangerous a weapon in the possession of an animal so ferocious,
and so well able to use it, the man, for some moments, was at a loss
what to do.  He had been accustomed, however, to quiet the creature,
even in its fiercest moods, by the use of a whip, and to this he now
resorted.  Upon sight of it, the Orang-Outang sprang at once through
the door of the chamber, down the stairs, and thence, through a
window, unfortunately open, into the street.

The Frenchman followed in despair; the ape, razor still in hand,
occasionally stopping to look back and gesticulate at his pursuer,
until the latter had nearly come up with it.  It then again made off.
In this manner the chase continued for a long time.  The streets were
profoundly quiet, as it was nearly three o'clock in the morning.  In
passing down an alley in the rear of the Rue Morgue, the fugitive's
attention was arrested by a light gleaming from the open window of
Madame L'Espanaye's chamber, in the fourth story of her house.
Rushing to the building, it perceived the lightning-rod, clambered up
with inconceivable agility, grasped the shutter, which was thrown
fully back against the wall, and, by its means, swung itself directly
upon the headboard of the bed.  The whole feat did not occupy a
minute.  The shutter was kicked open again by the Orang-Outang as it
entered the room.

The sailor, in the meantime, was both rejoiced and perplexed.  He had
strong hopes of now recapturing the brute, as it could scarcely
escape from the trap into which it had ventured, except by the rod,
where it might be intercepted as it came down.  On the other hand,
there was much cause for anxiety as to what it might do in the house.
This latter reflection urged the man still to follow the fugitive.  A
lightning-rod is ascended without difficulty, especially by a sailor;
but, when he had arrived as high as the window, which lay far to his
left, his career was stopped; the most that he could accomplish was
to reach over so as to obtain a glimpse of the interior of the room.
At this glimpse he nearly fell from his hold through excess of
horror.  Now it was that those hideous shrieks arose upon the night,
which had startled from slumber the inmates of the Rue Morgue.
Madame L'Espanaye and her daughter, habited in their night clothes,
had apparently been occupied in arranging some papers in the iron
chest already mentioned, which had been wheeled into the middle of
the room.  It was open, and its contents lay beside it on the floor.
The victims must have been sitting with their backs toward the
window; and, from the time elapsing between the ingress of the beast
and the screams, it seems probable that it was not immediately
perceived.  The flapping to of the shutter would naturally have been
attributed to the wind.

As the sailor looked in, the gigantic animal had seized Madame
L'Espanaye by the hair (which was loose, as she had been combing it),
and was flourishing the razor about her face, in imitation of the
motions of a barber.  The daughter lay prostrate and motionless; she
had swooned.  The screams and struggles of the old lady (during which
the hair was torn from her head) had the effect of changing the
probably pacific purposes of the Orang-Outang into those of wrath.
With one determined sweep of its muscular arm it nearly severed her
head from her body.  The sight of blood inflamed its anger into
frenzy.  Gnashing its teeth, and flashing fire from its eyes, it flew
upon the body of the girl and imbedded its fearful talons in her
throat, retaining its grasp until she expired.  Its wandering and
wild glances fell at this moment upon the head of the bed, over which
the face of its master, rigid with horror, was just discernible.  The
fury of the beast, who no doubt bore still in mind the dreaded whip,
was instantly converted into fear.  Conscious of having deserved
punishment, it seemed desirous of concealing its bloody deeds, and
skipped about the chamber in an agony of nervous agitation; throwing
down and breaking the furniture as it moved, and dragging the bed
from the bedstead.  In conclusion, it seized first the corpse of the
daughter, and thrust it up the chimney, as it was found; then that of
the old lady, which it immediately hurled through the window headlong.

As the ape approached the casement with its mutilated burden, the
sailor shrank aghast to the rod, and, rather gliding than clambering
down it, hurried at once home--dreading the consequences of the
butchery, and gladly abandoning, in his terror, all solicitude about
the fate of the Orang-Outang.  The words heard by the party upon the
staircase were the Frenchman's exclamations of horror and affright,
commingled with the fiendish jabberings of the brute.

I have scarcely anything to add.  The Orang-Outang must have escaped
from the chamber, by the rod, just before the breaking of the door.
It must have closed the window as it passed through it.  It was
subsequently caught by the owner himself, who obtained for it a very
large sum at the Jardin des Plantes.  Le Bon was instantly released,
upon our narration of the circumstances (with some comments from
Dupin) at the bureau of the Prefect of Police.  This functionary,
however well disposed to my friend, could not altogether conceal his
chagrin at the turn which affairs had taken, and was fain to indulge
in a sarcasm or two about the propriety of every person minding his
own business.

"Let him talk," said Dupin, who had not thought it necessary to
reply.  "Let him discourse; it will ease his conscience.  I am
satisfied with having defeated him in his own castle.  Nevertheless,
that he failed in the solution of this mystery, is by no means that
matter for wonder which he supposes it; for, in truth, our friend the
Prefect is somewhat too cunning to be profound.  In his wisdom is no
_stamen_.  It is all head and no body, like the pictures of the
Goddess Laverna--or, at best, all head and shoulders, like a codfish.
But he is a good creature after all.  I like him especially for one
master stroke of cant, by which he has attained his reputation for
ingenuity; I mean the way he has '_de nier ce qui est, et d'expliquer
ce qui n'est pas_.'"*


* Rousseau--Nouvelle Heloise.




THE MYSTERY OF MARIE ROGET

BY EDGAR ALLAN POE

_This is quite properly designated, in the sub-title, as a sequel to
the story that precedes it, though, as M. Dupin himself points out,
the case presented is a far more intricate one._

_Explanations as to the origin of the story are omitted from this
note, as they already appear with sufficient completeness in the
foot-notes which accompany the opening of the story._



THE MYSTERY OF MARIE ROGET[1]

A SEQUEL TO "THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE"

By EDGAR ALLAN POE


[1] Upon the original publication of "Marie Roget," the footnotes now
appended were considered unnecessary; but the lapse of several years
since the tragedy upon which the tale is based, renders it expedient
to give them, and also to say a few words in explanation of the
general design.  A young girl, _Mary Cecilia Rogers_, was murdered in
the vicinity of New York; and although her death occasioned an
intense and long-enduring excitement, the mystery attending it had
remained unsolved at the period when the present paper was written
and published (November, 1842).  Herein, under pretense of relating
the fate of a Parisian _grisette_, the author has followed, in minute
detail, the essential, while merely paralleling the inessential facts
of the real murder of Mary Rogers.  Thus all argument founded upon
the fiction is applicable to the truth: and the investigation of the
truth was the object.

The "Mystery of Marie Roget" was composed at a distance from the
scene of the atrocity, and with no other means of investigation than
the newspapers afforded.  Thus much escaped the writer of which he
could have availed himself had he been upon the spot and visited the
localities.  It may not be improper to record, nevertheless, that the
confessions of two persons (one of them the Madame Deluc of the
narrative), made at different periods, long subsequent to the
publication, confirmed, in full, not only the general conclusion, but
absolutely all the chief hypothetical details by which that
conclusion was attained.


Es giebt eine Reihe idealischer Begebenheiten, die der Wirklichkeit
parallel lauft.  Selten fallen sie zusammen.  Menschen und zufalle
modificiren gewohnlich die idealische Begebenheit, so dass sie
unvollkommen erscheint, und ihre Folgen gleichfalls unvollkommen
sind.  So bei der Reformation; statt des Protestantismus kam das
Lutherthum hervor.

There are ideal series of events which run parallel with the real
ones.  They rarely coincide.  Men and circumstances generally modify
the ideal train of events, so that it seems imperfect, and its
consequences are equally imperfect.  Thus with the Reformation;
instead of Protestantism came Lutheranism.--_Novalis_.[2] "_Moral
Ansichten_."


[2] The _nom de plume_ of Von Hardenburg.


There are few persons, even among the calmest thinkers who have not
occasionally been startled into a vague yet thrilling half-credence
in the supernatural, by _coincidences_ of so seemingly marvelous a
character that, as _mere_ coincidences, the intellect has been unable
to receive them.  Such sentiments--for the half-credences of which I
speak have never the full force of thought--such sentiments are
seldom thoroughly stifled unless by reference to the doctrine of
chance, or, as it is technically termed, the Calculus of
Probabilities.  Now, this Calculus is, in its essence, purely
mathematical; and thus we have the anomaly of the most rigidly exact
in science applied to the shadow and spirituality of the most
intangible in speculation.

The extraordinary details which I am now called upon to make public,
will be found to form, as regards sequence of time, the primary
branch of a series of scarcely intelligible _coincidences_, whose
secondary or concluding branch will be recognized by all readers in
the late murder of Marie Cecilia Rogers, at New York.

When, in an article entitled "The Murders in the Rue Morgue," I
endeavored, about a year ago, to depict some very remarkable features
in the mental character of my friend, the Chevalier C. Auguste Dupin,
it did not occur to me that I should ever resume the subject.  This
depicting of character constituted my design; and this design was
thoroughly fulfilled in the wild train of circumstances brought to
instance Dupin's idiosyncrasy.  I might have adduced other examples,
but I should have proved no more.  Late events, however, in their
surprising development, have startled me into some further details,
which will carry with them the air of extorted confession.  Hearing
what I have lately heard, it would be indeed strange should I remain
silent in regard to what I both heard and saw so long ago.

Upon the winding up of the tragedy involved in the deaths of Madame
L'Espanaye and her daughter, the Chevalier dismissed the affair at
once from his attention, and relapsed into his old habits of moody
reverie.  Prone, at all times, to abstraction, I readily fell in with
his humor; and continuing to occupy our chambers in the Faubourg
Saint Germain, we gave the Future to the winds, and slumbered
tranquilly in the Present, weaving the dull world around us into
dreams.

But these dreams were not altogether uninterrupted.  It may readily
be supposed that the part played by my friend in the drama at the Rue
Morgue had not failed of its impression upon the fancies of the
Parisian police.  With its emissaries, the name of Dupin had grown
into a household word.  The simple character of those inductions by
which he had disentangled the mystery never having been explained
even to the Prefect, or to any other individual than myself, of
course it is not surprising that the affair was regarded as little
less than miraculous, or that the Chevalier's analytical abilities
acquired for him the credit of intuition.  His frankness would have
led him to disabuse every inquirer of such prejudice; but his
indolent humor forbade all further agitation of a topic whose
interest to himself had long ceased.  It thus happened that he found
himself the cynosure of the political eyes; and the cases were not
few in which attempt was made to engage his services at the
Prefecture.  One of the most remarkable instances was that of the
murder of a young girl named Marie Rog√™t.

This event occurred about two years after the atrocity in the Rue
Morgue.  Marie, whose Christian and family name will at once arrest
attention from their resemblance to those of the unfortunate "cigar
girl," was the only daughter of the widow Estelle Rog√™t.  The father
had died during the child's infancy, and from the period of his
death, until within eighteen months before the assassination which
forms the subject of our narrative, the mother and daughter had dwelt
together in the Rue Pav√©e Saint Andr√©e[3]; Madame there keeping a
_pension_, assisted by Marie.  Affairs went on thus until the latter
had attained her twenty-second year, when her great beauty attracted
the notice of a perfumer, who occupied one of the shops in the
basement of the Palais Royal, and whose custom lay chiefly among the
desperate adventurers infesting that neighborhood.  Monsieur Le
Blanc[4] was not unaware of the advantages to be derived from the
attendance of the fair Marie in his perfumery; and his liberal
proposals were accepted eagerly by the girl, although with somewhat
more of hesitation by Madame.


[3] Nassau Street.

[4] Anderson.


The anticipations of the shopkeeper were realized, and his rooms soon
became notorious through the charms of sprightly _grisette_.  She had
been in his employ about a year, when her admirers were thrown into
confusion by her sudden disappearance from the shop.  Monsieur Le
Blanc was unable to account for her absence, and Madame Rog√™t was
distracted with anxiety and terror.  The public papers immediately
took up the theme, and the police were upon the point of making
serious investigations when, one fine morning after the lapse of a
week, Marie in good health, but with a somewhat saddened air, made
her reappearance at her usual counter in the perfumery.  All inquiry,
except that of a private character, was, of course, immediately
hushed.  Monsieur Le Blanc professed total ignorance, as before.
Marie, with Madame, replied to all questions, that the last week had
been spent at the house of a relation in the country.  Thus the
affair died away, and was generally forgotten; for the girl,
ostensibly to relieve herself from the impertinence of curiosity,
soon bade a final adieu to the perfumer, and sought the shelter of
her mother's residence in the Rue Pav√©e Saint Andr√©e.

It was about five months after this return home that her friends were
alarmed by her sudden disappearance for the second time.  Three days
elapsed, and nothing was heard of her.  On the fourth her corpse was
found floating in the Seine,[5] near the shore which is opposite the
Quartier of the Rue Saint Andr√©e, and at a point not very far distant
from the secluded neighborhood of the Barri√®re du Roule.[6]


[5] The Hudson.

[6] Weehawken.


The atrocity of this murder (for it was at once evident that murder
had been committed), the youth and beauty of the victim and, above
all, her previous notoriety, conspired to produce intense excitement
in the minds of the sensitive Parisians.  I can call to mind no
similar occurrence producing so general and so intense an effect.
For several weeks, in the discussion of this one absorbing theme,
even the momentous political topics of the day were forgotten.  The
Prefect made unusual exertions; and the powers of the whole Parisian
police, were, of course, tasked to the utmost extent.

"Upon the first discovery of the corpse, it was not supposed that the
murderer would be able to elude, for more than a very brief period,
the inquisition which was immediately set on foot.  It was not until
the expiration of a week that it was deemed necessary to offer a
reward; and even then this reward was limited to a thousand francs.
In the meantime the investigation proceeded with vigor, if not always
with judgment, and numerous individuals were examined to no purpose;
while, owing to the continual absence of all clue to the mystery, the
popular excitement greatly increased.  At the end of the tenth day it
was thought advisable to double the sum originally proposed; and, at
length, the second week having elapsed without leading to any
discoveries, and the prejudice which always exists in Paris against
the police having given vent to itself in several serious _emeutes_,
the Prefect took it upon himself to offer the sum of twenty-thousand
francs "for the conviction of the assassin," or, if more than one
should prove to have been implicated, "for the conviction of any one
of the assassins."  In the proclamation setting forth this reward, a
full pardon was promised to any accomplice who should come forward in
evidence against his fellow; and to the whole was appended, wherever
it appeared, the private placard of a committee of citizens, offering
ten thousand francs in addition to the amount proposed by the
Prefecture.  The entire reward thus stood at no less than thirty
thousand francs, which will be regarded as an extraordinary sum when
we consider the humble condition of the girl, and the great
frequency, in large cities, of such atrocities as the one described.

No one doubted now that the mystery of this murder would be
immediately brought to light.  But although, in one or two instances,
arrests were made which promised elucidation, yet nothing was
elicited which could implicate the parties suspected; and they were
discharged forthwith.  Strange as it may appear, the third week from
the discovery of the body had passed, and passed without any light
being thrown upon the subject, before even a rumor of the events
which had so agitated the public mind reached the ears of Dupin and
myself.  Engaged in researches which had absorbed our whole
attention, it had been nearly a month since either of us had gone
abroad, or received a visitor, or more than glanced at the leading
political articles in one of the daily papers.  The first
intelligence of the murder was brought us by G----, in person.  He
called upon us early in the afternoon of the thirteenth of July,
18--, and remained with us until late in the night.  He had been
piqued by the failure of all his endeavors to ferret out the
assassins.  His reputation--so he said with a peculiarly Parisian
air--was at stake.  Even his honor was concerned.  The eyes of the
public were upon him; and there was really no sacrifice which he
would not be willing to make for the development of the mystery.  He
concluded a somewhat droll speech with a compliment upon what he was
pleased to term the _tact_ of Dupin, and made him a direct and
certainly a liberal proposition, the precise nature of which I do not
feel myself at liberty to disclose, but which has no bearing upon the
proper subject of my narrative.

The compliment my friend rebutted as best he could, but the
proposition he accepted at once, although its advantages were
altogether provisional.  This point being settled, the Prefect broke
forth at once, into explanations of his own views, interspersing them
with long comments upon the evidence; of which latter we were not yet
in possession.  He discoursed much, and, beyond doubt, learnedly;
while I hazarded an occasional suggestion as the night wore drowsily
away.  Dupin, sitting steadily in his accustomed armchair, was the
embodiment of respectful attention.  He wore spectacles during the
whole interview; and an occasional glance beneath their green glasses
sufficed to convince me that he slept not the less soundly, because
silently, throughout the seven or eight leaden-footed hours which
immediately preceded the departure of the Prefect.

In the morning I procured, at the Prefecture, a full report of all
the evidence elicited, and, at the various newspaper offices, a copy
of every paper in which, from first to last, had been published any
decisive information in regard to this sad affair.  Freed from all
that was positively disproved, this mass of information stood thus:

Marie Rog√™t left the residence of her mother, in the Rue Pav√©e St.
Andr√©e, about nine o'clock in the morning of day, June the
twenty-second, 18--.  In going out, she gave notice to a Monsieur
Jacques St. Eustache,[7] and to him only, of her intention to spend
the day with an aunt, who resided in the Rue des Dr√¥mes.  The Rue des
Dr√¥mes is a short and narrow but populous thoroughfare, not far from
the banks of the river, and at a distance of some two miles, in the
most direct course possible, from the _pension_ of Madame Rog√™t.  St.
Eustache was the accepted suitor of Marie, and lodged, as well as
took his meals, at the _pension_.  He was to have gone for his
betrothed at dusk, and to have escorted her home.  In the afternoon,
however, it came on to rain heavily; and, supposing that she would
remain all night at her aunt's (as she had done under similar
circumstances before), he did not think it necessary to keep his
promise.  As night drew on, Madame Rog√™t (who was an infirm old lady,
seventy years of age) was heard to express a fear "that she should
never see Marie again"; but this observation attracted little
attention at the time.


[7] Payne.


On Monday it was ascertained that the girl had not been to the Rue
des Dr√¥mes; and when the day elapsed without tidings of her, a tardy
search was instituted at several points in the city and its environs.
It was not, however, until the fourth day from the period of her
disappearance that anything satisfactory was ascertained respecting
her.  On this day (Wednesday, the twenty-fifth of June) a Monsieur
Beauvais,[8] who, with a friend, had been making inquiries for Marie
near the Barri√®re du Roule, on the shore of the Seine which is
opposite the Rue Pav√©e St. Andr√©e, was informed that a corpse had
just been towed ashore by some fishermen, who had found it floating
in the river.  Upon seeing the body, Beauvais, after some hesitation,
identified it as that of the perfumery girl.  His friend recognized
it more promptly.


[8] Crommelin.


The face was suffused with dark blood, some of which issued from the
mouth.  No foam was seen, as in the case of the merely drowned.
There was no discoloration in the cellular tissue.  About the throat
were bruises and impressions of fingers.  The arms were bent over on
the chest, and were rigid.  The right hand was clenched; the left
partially open.  On the left wrist were two circular excoriations,
apparently the effect of ropes, or of a rope in more than one
volution.  A part of the right wrist, also, was much chafed, as well
as the back throughout its extent, but more especially at the
shoulder-blades.  In bringing the body to the shore the fishermen had
attached to it a rope, but none of the excoriations had been effected
by this.  The flesh of the neck was much swollen.  There were no cuts
apparent, or bruises which appeared the effect of blows.  A piece of
lace was found tied so tightly around the neck as to be hidden from
sight; it was completely buried in the flesh, and was fastened by a
knot which lay just under the left ear.  This alone would have
sufficed to produce death.  The medical testimony spoke confidently
of the virtuous character of the deceased.  She had been subjected,
it is said, to brutal violence.  The corpse was in such condition
when found that there could have been no difficulty in its
recognition by friends.

The dress was much torn and otherwise disordered.  In the outer
garment, a slip, about a foot wide, had been torn upward from the
bottom hem to the waist, but not torn off.  It was wound three times
around the waist, and secured by a sort of hitch in the back.  The
dress immediately beneath the frock was of fine muslin; and from this
a slip eighteen inches wide had been torn entirely out--torn very
evenly and with great care.  It was found around her neck, fitting
loosely, and secured with a hard knot.  Over this muslin slip and the
slip of lace the strings of a bonnet were attached, the bonnet being
appended.  The knot by which the strings of the bonnet were fastened
was not a lady's, but a slip or sailor's knot.

After the recognition of the corpse, it was not, as usual, taken to
the Morgue (this formality being superfluous), but hastily interred
not far from the spot at which it was brought ashore.  Through the
exertions of Beauvais, the matter was industriously hushed up, as far
as possible; and several days had elapsed before any public emotion
resulted.  A weekly paper,[9] however, at length took up the theme;
the corpse was disinterred, and a reexamination instituted; but
nothing was elicited beyond what has been already noted.  The
clothes, however, were now submitted to the mother and friends of the
deceased, and fully identified as those worn by the girl upon leaving
home.


[9] The New York "Mercury."


Meantime, the excitement increased hourly.  Several individuals were
arrested and discharged.  St. Eustache fell especially under
suspicion; and he failed, at first, to give an intelligible account
of his whereabouts during the Sunday on which Marie left home.
Subsequently, however, he submitted to Monsieur G----, affidavits,
accounting satisfactorily for every hour of the day in question.  As
time passed no discovery ensued, a thousand contradictory rumors were
circulated, and journalists busied themselves in _suggestions_.
Among these, the one which attracted the most notice was the idea
that Marie Rog√™t still lived--that the corpse found in the Seine was
that of some other unfortunate.  It will be proper that I submit to
the reader some passages which embody the suggestion alluded to.
These passages are _literal_ translations from "L'Etoile,"[10] a
paper conducted, in general, with much ability.


[10] The New York "Brother Jonathan," edited by H. Hastings Weld, Esq.


"Mademoiselle Rog√™t left her mother's house on Sunday morning, June
the twenty-second, 18--, with the ostensible purpose of going to see
her aunt, or some other connection, in the Rue des Dr√¥mes.  From that
hour nobody is proved to have seen her.  There is no trace or tidings
of her at all....  There has no person, whatever, come forward, so
far, who saw her at all on that day, after she left her mother's
door....  Now, though we have no evidence that Marie Rog√™t was in the
land of the living after nine o'clock on Sunday, June the
twenty-second, we have proof that, up to that hour, she was alive.
On Wednesday noon, at twelve, a female body was discovered afloat on
the shore of the Barri√®re du Roule.  This was, even if we presume
that Marie Rog√™t was thrown into the river within three hours after
she left her mother's house, only three days from the time she left
her home--three days to an hour.  But it is folly to suppose that the
murder, if murder was committed on her body, could have been
consummated soon enough to have enabled her murderers to throw the
body into the river before midnight.  Those who are guilty of such
horrid crimes choose darkness rather than light....  Thus we see that
if the body found in the river was that of Marie Rog√™t, it could only
have been in the water two and a half days, or three at the outside.
All experience has shown that drowned bodies, or bodies thrown into
the water immediately after death by violence, require from six to
ten days for sufficient decomposition to take place to bring them to
the top of the water.  Even where a cannon is fired over a corpse,
and it rises before at least five or six days' immersion, it sinks
again, if left alone.  Now, we ask, what was there in this case to
cause a departure from the ordinary course of nature? ... If the body
had been kept in its mangled state on shore until Tuesday night, some
trace would be found on shore of the murderers.  It is a doubtful
point, also, whether the body would be so soon afloat, even were it
thrown in after having been dead two days.  And, furthermore, it is
exceedingly improbable that any villains who had committed such a
murder as is here supposed, would have thrown the body in without
weight to sink it, when such a precaution could have so easily been
taken."


The editor here proceeds to argue that the body must have been in the
water "not three days merely, but, at least, five times three days,"
because it was so far decomposed that Beauvais had great difficulty
in recognizing it.  This latter point, however, was fully disproved.
I continue the translation:


"What, then, are the facts on which M. Beauvais says that he has no
doubt the body was that of Marie Rog√™t?  He ripped up the gown
sleeve, and says he found marks which satisfied him of the identity.
The public generally supposed those marks to have consisted of some
description of scars.  He rubbed the arm and found hair upon
it--something as indefinite, we think, as can readily be imagined--as
little conclusive as finding an arm in the sleeve.  M. Beauvais did
not return that night, but sent word to Madame Rog√™t, at seven
o'clock, on Wednesday evening, that an investigation was still in
progress respecting her daughter.  If we allow that Madame Rog√™t,
from her age and grief, could not go over (which is allowing a great
deal), there certainly must have been some one who would have thought
it worth while to go over and attend the investigation, if they
thought the body was that of Marie.  Nobody went over.  There was
nothing said or heard about the matter in the Rue Pav√©e St. Andr√©e,
that reached even the occupants of the same building.  M. St.
Eustache, the lover and intended husband of Marie, who boarded in her
mother's house, deposes that he did not hear of the discovery of the
body of his intended until the next morning, when M. Beauvais came
into his chamber and told him of it.  For an item of news like this,
it strikes us it was very coolly received."


In this way the journal endeavored to create the impression of an
apathy on the part of the relatives of Marie, inconsistent with the
supposition that these relatives believed the corpse to be hers.  Its
insinuations amount to this: that Marie, with the connivance of her
friends, had absented herself from the city for reasons involving a
charge against her chastity; and that these friends upon the
discovery of a corpse in the Seine, somewhat resembling that of the
girl, had availed themselves of the opportunity to impress the public
with the belief of her death.  But "L'Etoile" was again overhasty.
It was distinctly proved that no apathy, such as was imagined,
existed; that the old lady was exceedingly feeble, and so agitated as
to be unable to attend to any duty; that St. Eustache, so far from
receiving the news coolly, was distracted with grief, and bore
himself so frantically, that M.  Beauvais prevailed upon a friend and
relative to take charge of him, and prevent his attending the
examination at the disinterment.  Moreover, although it was stated by
"L'Etoile" that the corpse was reinterred at the public expense, that
an advantageous offer of private sepulture absolutely declined by the
family, and that no member of the family attended the
ceremonial;--although, I say, all this was asserted by "L'Etoile" in
furtherance of the impression it designed to convey--yet all this was
satisfactorily disproved.  In a subsequent number of the paper, an
attempt was made to throw suspicion upon Beauvais himself.  The
editor says:


"Now, then, a change comes over the matter.  We are told that, on one
occasion, while a Madame B---- was at Madame Rog√™t's house, M.
Beauvais, who was going out, told her that a gendarme was expected
there, and that she, Madame B., must not say anything to the gendarme
until he returned, but let the matter be for him....  In the present
posture of affairs, M. Beauvais appears to have the whole matter
locked up in his head.  A single step can not be taken without M.
Beauvais, for, go which way you will, you run against him....  For
some reason he determined that nobody shall have anything to do with
the proceedings but himself, and he has elbowed the male relatives
out of the way, according to their representations, in a very
singular manner.  He seems to have been very much averse to
permitting the relatives to see the body."


By the following fact, some color was given to the suspicion thus
thrown upon Beauvais.  A visitor at his office, a few days prior to
the girl's disappearance, and during the absence of its occupant, had
observed a rose in the keyhole of the door, and the name "_Marie_"
inscribed upon a slate which hung near at hand.

The general impression, so far as we were enabled to glean it from
the newspapers, seemed to be, that Marie had been the victim of a
gang of desperadoes--that by these she had been borne across the
river, maltreated, and murdered.

"Le Commerciel,"[11] however, a print of extensive influence, was
earnest in combating this popular idea.  I quote a passage or two
from its columns:


[11] New York "Journal of Commerce."


"We are persuaded that pursuit has hitherto been on a false scent, so
far as it has been directed to the Barri√®re du Roule.  It is
impossible that a person so well known to thousands as this young
woman was, should have passed three blocks without some one having
seen her; and any one who saw her would have remembered it, for she
interested all who knew her.  It was when the streets were full of
people, when she went out....  It is impossible that she could have
gone to the Barri√®re du Roule, or to the Rue des Dr√¥mes, without
being recognized by a dozen persons; yet no one has come forward who
saw her outside her mother's door, and there is no evidence, except
the testimony concerning her _expressed intentions_, that she did go
out at all.  Her gown was torn, bound round her, and tied; and by
that the body was carried as a bundle.  If the murder had been
committed at the Barri√®re du Roule, there would have been no
necessity for any such arrangement.  The fact that the body was found
floating near the Barri√®re is no proof as to where it was thrown into
the water....  A piece of one of the unfortunate girl's petticoats,
two feet long and one foot wide, was torn out and tied under her chin
around the back of her head, probably to prevent screams.  This was
done by fellows who had no pocket-handkerchief."


A day or two before the Prefect called upon us, however, some
important information reached the police, which seemed to overthrow,
at least, the chief portion of "Le Commerciel's" argument.  Two small
boys, sons of a Madame Deluc, while roaming among the woods near the
Barri√®re du Roule, chanced to penetrate a close thicket, within which
were three or four large stones, forming a kind of seat with a back
and footstool.  On the upper stone lay a white petticoat; on the
second, a silk scarf.  A parasol, gloves, and a pocket-handkerchief
were also here found.  The handkerchief bore the name "Marie Rog√™t."
Fragments of dress were discovered on the brambles around.  The earth
was trampled, the bushes were broken, and there was every evidence of
a struggle.  Between the thicket and the river, the fences were found
taken down, and the ground bore evidence of some heavy burden having
been dragged along it.

A weekly paper, "Le Soleil,"[12] had the following comments upon this
discovery--comments which merely echoed the sentiment of the whole
Parisian press:


[12] Philadelphia "Saturday Evening Post," edited by C. I. Peterson,
Esq.


"The things had all evidently been there at least three or four
weeks; they were all mildewed down hard with the action of the rain,
and stuck together from mildew.  The grass had grown around and over
some of them.  The silk on the parasol was strong, but the threads of
it were run together within.  The upper part, where it had been
doubled and folded, was all mildewed and rotten, and tore on its
being opened....  The pieces of her frock torn out by the bushes were
about three inches wide and six inches long.  One part was the hem of
the frock, and it had been mended; the other piece was part of the
skirt, not the hem.  They looked like strips torn off, and were on
the thorn bush, about a foot from the ground....  There can be no
doubt, therefore, that the spot of this appalling outrage has been
discovered."


Consequent upon this discovery, new evidence appeared.  Madame Deluc
testified that she keeps a roadside inn not far from the bank of the
river, opposite the Barri√®re du Roule.  The neighborhood is
secluded--particularly so.  It is the usual Sunday resort of
blackguards from the city, who cross the river in boats.  About three
o'clock, in the afternoon of the Sunday in question, a young girl
arrived at the inn, accompanied by a young man of dark complexion.
The two remained here for some time.  On their departure, they took
the road to some thick woods in the vicinity.  Madame Deluc's
attention was called to the dress worn by the girl, on account of its
resemblance to one worn by a deceased relative.  A scarf was
particularly noticed.  Soon after the departure of the couple, a gang
of miscreants made their appearance, behaved boisterously, ate and
drank without making payment, followed in the route of the young man
and girl, returned to the inn about dusk, and recrossed the river as
if in great haste.

It was soon after dark, upon this same evening, that Madame Deluc, as
well as her eldest son, heard the screams of a female in the vicinity
of the inn.  The screams were violent but brief.  Madame D.
recognized not only the scarf which was found in the thicket, but the
dress which was discovered upon the corpse.  An omnibus driver,
Valence,[13] now also testified that he saw Marie Rog√™t cross a ferry
on the Seine, on the Sunday in question, in company with a young man
of dark complexion.  He, Valence, knew Marie, and could not be
mistaken in her identity.  The articles found in the thicket were
fully identified by the relatives of Marie.


[13] Adam.


The items of evidence and information thus collected by myself, from
the newspapers, at the suggestion of Dupin, embraced only one more
point--but this was a point of seemingly vast consequence.  It
appears that, immediately after the discovery of the clothes as above
described, the lifeless or nearly lifeless body of St. Eustache,
Marie's betrothed, was found in the vicinity of what all now supposed
the scene of the outrage.  A phial labeled "laudanum," and emptied,
was found near him.  His breath gave evidence of the poison.  He died
without speaking.  Upon his person was found a letter, briefly
stating his love for Marie, with his design of self-destruction.

"I need scarcely tell you," said Dupin, as he finished the perusal of
my notes, "that this is a far more intricate case than that of the
Rue Morgue; from which it differs in one important respect.  This is
an _ordinary_, although an atrocious, instance of crime.  There is
nothing peculiarly _outre_ about it.  You will observe that, for this
reason, the mystery has been considered easy, when, for this reason,
it should have been considered difficult, of solution.  Thus, at
first, it was thought unnecessary to offer a reward.  The myrmidons
of G---- were able at once to comprehend how and why such an atrocity
_might have been_ committed.  They could picture to their
imaginations a mode--many modes--and a motive--many motives; and
because it was not impossible that either of these numerous modes and
motives could have been the actual one, they have taken it for
granted that one of them must.  But the ease with which these
variable fancies were entertained, and the very plausibility which
each assumed, should have been understood as indicative rather of the
difficulties than of the facilities which must attend elucidation.  I
have, therefore, observed that it is by prominences above the plane
of the ordinary, that reason feels her way, if at all, in her search
for the true, and that the proper question in cases such as this, is
not so much 'what has occurred?' as 'what has occurred that has never
occurred before?'  In the investigations at the house of Madame
L'Espanaye,[14] the agents of G---- were discouraged and confounded
by that very _unusualness_ which, to a properly regulated intellect,
would have afforded the surest omen of success; while this same
intellect might have been plunged in despair at the ordinary
character of all that met the eye in the case of the perfumery girl,
and yet told of nothing but easy triumph to the functionaries of the
Prefecture.


[14] See "Murders in the Rue Morgue."


"In the case of Madame L'Espanaye and her daughter, there was, even
at the beginning of our investigation, no doubt that murder had been
committed.  The idea of suicide was excluded at once.  Here, too, we
are freed, at the commencement, from all supposition of self-murder.
The body found at the Barri√®re du Roule was found under such
circumstances as to leave us no room for embarrassment upon this
important point.  But it has been suggested that the corpse
discovered is not that of the Marie Rog√™t for the conviction of whose
assassin, or assassins, the reward is offered, and respecting whom,
solely, our agreement has been arranged with the Prefect.  We both
know this gentleman well.  It will not do to trust him too far.  If,
dating our inquiries from the body found, and then tracing a
murderer, we yet discover this body to be that of some other
individual than Marie; or if, starting from the living Marie, we find
her, yet find her unassassinated--in either case we lose our labor;
since it is Monsieur G---- with whom we have to deal.  For our own
purpose, therefore, if not for the purpose of justice, it is
indispensable that our first step should be the determination of the
identity of the corpse with the Marie Rog√™t who is missing.

"With the public the arguments of 'L'Etoile' have had weight; and
that the journal itself is convinced of their importance would appear
from the manner in which it commences one of its essays upon the
subject--'Several of the morning papers of the day,' it says, 'speak
of the _conclusive_ article in Monday's "'Etoile."'  To me, this
article appears conclusive of little beyond the zeal of its inditer.
We should bear in mind that, in general, it is the object of our
newspapers rather to create a sensation--to make a point--than to
further the cause of truth.  The latter end is only pursued when it
seems coincident with the former.  The print which merely falls in
with ordinary opinion (however well founded this opinion may be)
earns for itself no credit with the mob.  The mass of the people
regard as profound only him who suggests _pungent contradictions_ of
the general idea.  In ratiocination, not less than in literature, it
is the _epigram_ which is the most immediately and the most
universally appreciated.  In both, it is of the lowest order of merit.

"What I mean to say is, that it is the mingled epigram and melodrame
of the idea, that Marie Rog√™t still lives, rather than any true
plausibility in this idea, which have suggested it to 'L'Etoile,' and
secured it a favorable reception with the public.  Let us examine the
heads of this journal's argument; endeavoring to avoid the
incoherence with which it is originally set forth.

"The first aim of the writer is to show, from the brevity of the
interval between Marie's disappearance and the finding of the
floating corpse, that this corpse can not be that of Marie.  The
reduction of this interval to its smallest possible dimension,
becomes thus, at once, an object with the reasoner.  In the rash
pursuit of this object, he rushes into mere assumption at the outset.
'It is folly to suppose,' he says, 'that the murder, if murder was
committed on her body, could have been consummated soon enough to
have enabled her murderers to throw the body into the river before
midnight.'  We demand at once, and very naturally, _Why?_  Why is it
folly to suppose that the murder was committed _within five minutes_
after the girl's quitting her mother's house?  Why is it folly to
suppose that the murder was committed at any given period of the day?
There have been assassinations at all hours.  But, had the murder
taken place at any moment between nine o'clock in the morning of
Sunday and a quarter before midnight, there would still have been
time enough 'to throw the body into the river before midnight.'  This
assumption, then, amounts precisely to this--that the murder was not
committed on Sunday at all--and, if we allow 'L'Etoile' to assume
this, we may permit it any liberties whatever.  The paragraph
beginning 'It is folly to suppose that the murder, etc.,' however it
appears as printed in 'L'Etoile,' may be imagined to have existed
actually _thus_ in the brain of its inditer: 'It is folly to suppose
that the murder, if murder was committed on the body, could have been
committed soon enough to have enabled her murderers to throw the body
into the river before midnight; it is folly, we say, to suppose all
this, and to suppose at the same time (as we are resolved to
suppose), that the body was _not_ thrown in until _after_
midnight'--a sentence sufficiently inconsequential in itself, but not
so utterly preposterous as the one printed.

"Were it my purpose," continued Dupin, "merely to _make out a case_
against this passage of 'L'Etoile's' argument, I might safely leave
it where it is.  It is not, however, with 'L'Etoile' that we have to
do, but with the truth.  The sentence in question has but one
meaning, as it stands; and this meaning I have fairly stated; but it
is material that we go behind the mere words, for an idea which these
words have obviously intended, and failed to convey.  It was the
design of the journalists to say that at whatever period of the day
or night of Sunday this murder was committed, it was improbable that
the assassins would have ventured to bear the corpse to the river
before midnight.  And herein lies, really, the assumption of which I
complain.  It is assumed that the murder was committed at such a
position, and under such circumstances, that _the bearing it_ to the
river became necessary.  Now, the assassination might have taken
place upon the river's brink, or on the river itself; and, thus, the
throwing the corpse in the water might have been resorted to at any
period of the day or night, as the most obvious and most immediate
mode of disposal.  You will understand that I suggest nothing here as
probable, or as coincident with my opinion.  My design, so far, has
no reference to the facts of the case.  I wish merely to caution you
against the whole tone of _'L'Etoile's' suggestion_, by calling your
attention to its _ex-parte_ character at the outset.

"Having prescribed thus a limit to suit its own preconceived notions;
having assumed that, if this were the body of Marie, it could have
been in the water but a very brief time, the journal goes on to say:

"'All experience has shown that drowned bodies, or bodies thrown into
the water immediately after death by violence, require from six to
ten days for sufficient decomposition to take place to bring them to
the top of the water.  Even when a cannon is fired over a corpse, and
it rises before at least five or six days' immersion, it sinks again
if let alone.'

"These assertions have been tacitly received by every paper in Paris,
with the exception of 'Le Moniteur.'[15]  This latter print endeavors
to combat that portion of the paragraph which has reference to
'drowned bodies' only, by citing some five or six instances in which
the bodies of individuals known to be drowned were found floating
after the lapse of less time than is insisted upon by 'L'Etoile.'
But there is something excessively unphilosophical in the attempt, on
the part of 'Le Moniteur,' to rebut the general assertion of
'L'Etoile,' by a citation of particular instances militating against
that assertion.  Had it been possible to adduce fifty instead of five
examples of bodies found floating at the end of two or three days,
these fifty examples could still have been properly regarded only as
exceptions to 'L'Etoile's' rule, until such time as the rule itself
should be confuted.  Admitting the rule (and this 'Le Moniteur' does
not deny, insisting merely upon its exceptions), the argument of
'L'Etoile' is suffered to remain in full force; for this argument
does not pretend to involve more than a question of the _probability_
of the body having risen to the surface in less than three days; and
this probability will be in favor of 'L'Etoile's' position until the
instances so childishly adduced shall be sufficient in number to
establish an antagonistical rule.


[15] The New York "Commercial Advertiser" edited by Colonel Stone.


"You will see at once that all argument upon this head should be
urged, if at all, against the rule itself; and for this end we must
examine the _rationale_ of the rule.  Now the human body, in general,
is neither much lighter nor much heavier than the water of the Seine;
that is to say, the specific gravity of the human body, in its
natural condition, is about equal to the bulk of fresh water which it
displaces.  The bodies of fat and fleshy persons, with small bones,
and of women generally, are lighter than those of the lean and
large-boned, and of men; and the specific gravity of the water of a
river is somewhat influenced by the presence of the tide from the
sea.  But, leaving this tide out of the question, it may be said that
_very_ few human bodies will sink at all, even in fresh water, _of
their own accord_.  Almost any one, falling into a river, will be
enabled to float, if he suffer the specific gravity of the water
fairly to be adduced in comparison with his own--that is to say, if
he suffer his whole person to be immersed, with as little exception
as possible.  The proper position for one who can not swim is the
upright position of the walker on land, with the head thrown fully
back, and immersed; the mouth and nostrils alone remaining above the
surface.  Thus circumstanced, we shall find that we float without
difficulty and without exertion.  It is evident, however, that the
gravities of the body, and of the bulk of water displaced, are very
nicely balanced, and that a trifle will cause either to preponderate.
An arm, for instance, uplifted from the water, and thus deprived of
its support, is an additional weight sufficient to immerse the whole
head, while the accidental aid of the smallest piece of timber will
enable us to elevate the head so as to look about.  Now, in the
struggles of one unused to swimming, the arms are invariably thrown
upward, while an attempt is made to keep the head in its usual
perpendicular position.  The result is the immersion of the mouth and
nostrils, and the inception, during efforts to breathe while beneath
the surface, of water into the lungs.  Much is also received into the
stomach, and the whole body becomes heavier by the difference between
the weight of the air originally distending these cavities, and that
of the fluid which now fills them.  This difference is sufficient to
cause the body to sink, as a general rule; but is insufficient in the
case of individuals with small bones and an abnormal quantity of
flaccid or fatty matter.  Such individuals float even after drowning.

"The corpse, being supposed at the bottom of the river, will there
remain until, by some means, its specific gravity again becomes less
than that of the bulk of water which it displaces.  This effect is
brought about by decomposition or otherwise.  The result of
decomposition is the generation of gas, distending the cellular
tissues and all the cavities, and giving the puffed appearance which
is so horrible.  When this distension has so far progressed that the
bulk of the corpse is materially increased without a corresponding
increase of mass or weight, its specific gravity becomes less than
that of the water displaced, and it forthwith makes its appearance at
the surface.  But decomposition is modified by innumerable
circumstances--is hastened or retarded by innumerable agencies; for
example, by the heat or cold of the season, by the mineral
impregnation or purity of the water, by its depth or shallowness, by
its currency or stagnation, by the temperament of the body, by its
infection or freedom from disease before death.  Thus it is evident
that we can assign no period, with anything like accuracy, at which
the corpse shall rise through decomposition.  Under certain
conditions this result would be brought about within an hour; under
others it might not take place at all.  There are chemical infusions
by which the animal frame can be preserved forever from corruption;
the bichloride of mercury is one.  But, apart from decomposition,
there may be, and very usually is, a generation of gas within the
stomach, from the acetous fermentation of vegetable matter (or within
other cavities from other causes), sufficient to induce a distension
which will bring the body to the surface.  The effect produced by the
firing of a cannon is that of simple vibration.  This may either
loosen the corpse from the soft mud or ooze in which it is embedded,
thus permitting it to rise when other agencies have already prepared
it for so doing; or it may overcome the tenacity of some putrescent
portions of the cellular tissue, allowing the cavities to distend
under the influence of the gas.

"Having thus before us the whole philosophy of this subject, we can
easily test by it the assertions of 'L'Etoile.'  'All experience
shows,' says this paper, 'that drowned bodies, or bodies thrown into
the water immediately after death by violence, require from six to
ten days for sufficient decomposition to take place to bring them to
the top of the water.  Even when a cannon is fired over a corpse, and
it rises before at least five or six days' immersion, it sinks again
if let alone.'

"The whole of this paragraph must now appear a tissue of
inconsequence and incoherence.  All experience does _not_ show that
'drowned bodies' _require_ from six to ten days for sufficient
decomposition to take place to bring them to the surface.  Both
science and experience show that the period of their rising is, and
necessarily must be, indeterminate.  If, moreover, a body has risen
to the surface through firing of cannon, it will _not_ 'sink again if
let alone,' until decomposition has so far progressed as to permit
the escape of the generated gas.  But I wish to call your attention
to the distinction which is made between 'drowned bodies,' and
'bodies thrown into the water immediately after death by violence.'
Although the writer admits the distinction, he yet includes them all
in the same category.  I have shown how it is that the body of a
drowning man becomes specifically heavier than its bulk of water, and
that he would not sink at all, except for the struggle by which he
elevates his arms above the surface, and his gasps for breath while
beneath the surface--gasps which supply by water the place of the
original air in the lungs.  But these struggles and these gasps would
not occur in the body 'thrown into the water immediately after death
by violence.'  Thus, in the latter instance, _the body, as a general
rule, would not sink at all_--a fact of which 'L'Etoile' is evidently
ignorant.  When decomposition had proceeded to a very great
extent--when the flesh had in a great measure left the bones--then,
indeed, but not _till_ then, should we lose sight of the corpse.

"And now what are we to make of the argument, that the body found
could not be that of Marie Rog√™t, because, three days only having
elapsed, this body was found floating?  If drowned, being a woman,
she might never have sunk; or, having sunk, might have reappeared in
twenty-four hours or less.  But no one supposes her to have been
drowned; and, dying before being thrown into the river, she might
have been found floating at any period afterward whatever.

"'But,' says 'L'Etoile,' 'if the body had been kept in its mangled
state on shore until Tuesday night, some trace would be found on
shore of the murderers.'  Here it is at first difficult to perceive
the intention of the reasoner.  He means to anticipate what he
imagines would be an objection to his theory--viz.: that the body was
kept on shore two days, suffering rapid decomposition--_more_ rapid
than if immersed in water.  He supposes that, had this been the case,
it_ might_ have appeared at the surface on the Wednesday, and thinks
that _only_ under such circumstances it could have so appeared.  He
is accordingly in haste to show that it was not kept on shore; for,
if so, 'some trace would be found on shore of the murderers.'  I
presume you smile at the _sequitur_.  You can not be made to see how
the mere _duration_ of the corpse on the shore could operate to
_multiply traces_ of the assassins.  Nor can I.

"'And furthermore it is exceedingly improbable,' continues our
journal, 'that any villains who had committed such a murder as is
here supposed, would have thrown the body in without weight to sink
it, when such a precaution could have so easily been taken.'
Observe, here, the laughable confusion of thought!  No one--not even
'L'Etoile'--disputes the murder committed _on the body found_.  The
marks of violence are too obvious.  It is our reasoner's object
merely to show that this body is not Marie's.  He wishes to prove
that Marie is not assassinated--not that the corpse was not.  Yet his
observation proves only the latter point.  Here is a corpse without
weight attached.  Murderers, casting it in, would not have failed to
attach a weight.  Therefore it was not thrown in by murderers.  This
is all which is proved, if any thing is.  The question of identity is
not even approached, and 'L'Etoile' has been at great pains merely to
gainsay now what it has admitted only a moment before.  'We are
perfectly convinced,' it says, 'that the body found was that of a
murdered female.'

"Nor is this the sole instance, even in this division of his subject,
where our reasoner unwittingly reasons against himself.  His evident
object, I have already said, is to reduce, as much as possible, the
interval between Marie's disappearance and the finding of the corpse.
Yet we find him _urging_ the point that no person saw the girl from
the moment of her leaving her mother's house.  'We have no evidence,'
he says, 'that Marie Rog√™t was in the land of the living after nine
o'clock on Sunday, June the twenty-second.'  As his argument is
obviously an _ex parte_ one, he should, at least, have left this
matter out of sight; for had any one been known to see Marie, say on
Monday, or on Tuesday, the interval in question would have been much
reduced, and, by his own ratiocination, the probability much
diminished of the corpse being that of the _grisette_.  It is,
nevertheless, amusing to observe that 'L'Etoile' insists upon its
point in the full belief of its furthering its general argument.

"Reperuse now that portion of this argument which has reference to
the identification of the corpse by Beauvais.  In regard to the hair
upon the arm, 'L'Etoile' has been obviously disingenuous.  M.
Beauvais, not being an idiot, could never have urged in
identification of the corpse, simply _hair upon its arm_.  No arm is
without hair.  The _generality_ of the expression of 'L'Etoile' is a
mere perversion of the witness's phraseology.  He must have spoken of
some _peculiarity_ in this hair.  It must have been a peculiarity of
color, of quantity, of length, or of situation.

"'Her foot,' says the journal, 'was small--so are thousands of feet.
Her garter is no proof whatever--nor is her shoe--for shoes and
garters are sold in packages.  The same may be said of the flowers in
her hat.  One thing upon which M. Beauvais strongly insists is, that
the clasp on the garter found had been set back to take it in.  This
amounts to nothing; for most women find it proper to take a pair of
garters home and fit them to the size of the limbs they are to
encircle, rather than to try them in the store where they purchase.'
Here it is difficult to suppose the reasoner in earnest.  Had M.
Beauvais, in his search for the body of Marie, discovered a corpse
corresponding in general size and appearance to the missing girl, he
would have been warranted (without reference to the question of
habiliment at all) in forming an opinion that his search had been
successful.  If, in addition to the point of general size and
contour, he had found upon the arm a peculiar hairy appearance which
he had observed upon the living Marie, his opinion might have been
justly strengthened; and the increase of positiveness might well have
been in the ratio of the peculiarity, or unusualness, of the hairy
mark.  If, the feet of Marie being small, those of the corpse were
also small, the increase of probability that the body was that of
Marie would not be an increase in a ratio merely arithmetical, but in
one highly geometrical, or accumulative.  Add to all this shoes such
as she had been known to wear upon the day of her disappearance, and,
although these shoes may be 'sold in packages,' you so far augment
the probability as to verge upon the certain.  What, of itself, would
be no evidence of identity, becomes through its corroborative
position, proof most sure.  Give us, then, flowers in the hat
corresponding to those worn by the missing girl, and we seek for
nothing further.  If only _one_ flower, we seek for nothing
further--what then if two or three, or more?  Each successive one is
multiple evidence--proof not _added_ to proof, but _multiplied_ by
hundreds or thousands.  Let us now discover, upon the deceased,
garters such as the living used, and it is almost folly to proceed.
But these garters are found to be tightened, by the setting back of a
clasp, in just such a manner as her own had been tightened by Marie
shortly previous to her leaving home.  It is now madness or hypocrisy
to doubt.  What 'L'Etoile' says in respect to this abbreviation of
the garters being an unusual occurrence, shows nothing beyond its own
pertinacity in error.  The elastic nature of the clasp-garter is
self-demonstration of the _unusualness_ of the abbreviation.  What is
made to adjust itself, must of necessity require foreign adjustment
but rarely.  It must have been by an accident, in its strictest
sense, that these garters of Marie needed the tightening described.
They alone would have amply established her identity.  But it is not
that the corpse was found to have the garters of the missing girl, or
found to have her shoes, or her bonnet, or the flowers of her bonnet,
or her feet, or a peculiar mark upon the arm, or her general size and
appearance--it is that the corpse had each, and _all collectively_.
Could it be proved that the editor of 'L'Etoile' _really_ entertained
a doubt, under the circumstances, there would be no need, in his
case, of a commission _de lunatico inquirendo_.  He has thought it
sagacious to echo the small talk of the lawyers, who, for the most
part, content themselves with echoing the rectangular precepts of the
courts.  I would here observe that very much of what is rejected as
evidence by a court, is the best of evidence to the intellect.  For
the court, guided itself by the general principles of evidence--the
recognized and booked principles--is averse from swerving at
particular instances.  And this steadfast adherence to principle,
with rigorous disregard of the conflicting exception, is a sure mode
of attaining the _maximum_ of attainable truth, in any long sequence
of time.  The practise, _en masse_, is therefore philosophical; but
it is not the less certain that it engenders vast individual
error.[16]


[16] "A theory based on the qualities of an object, will prevent its
being unfolded according to its objects; and he who arranges topics
in reference to their causes, will cease to value them according to
their results.  Thus the jurisprudence of every nation will show
that, when law becomes a science and a system, it ceases to be
justice.  The errors into which a blind devotion to _principles_ of
classification has led the common law will be seen by observing how
often the legislature has been obliged to come forward to restore the
equity its scheme had lost."--_Landor_.


"In respect to the insinuations leveled at Beauvais, you will be
willing to dismiss them in a breath.  You have already fathomed the
true character of this good gentleman.  He is a _busybody_, with much
of romance and little of wit.  Any one so constituted will readily so
conduct himself, upon occasion of _real_ excitement, as to render
himself liable to suspicion on the part of the over-acute, or the
ill-disposed.  M. Beauvais (as it appears from your notes) had some
personal interviews with the editor of 'L'Etoile' and offended him by
venturing an opinion that the corpse, notwithstanding the theory of
the editor, was, in sober fact, that of Marie.  'He persists,' says
the paper, 'in asserting the corpse to be that of Marie, but can not
give a circumstance, in addition to those which we have commented
upon, to make others believe.'  Now, without readverting to the fact
that stronger evidence 'to make others believe' could _never_ have
been adduced, it may be remarked that a man may very well be
understood to believe, in a case of this kind, without the ability to
advance a single reason for the belief of a second party.  Nothing is
more vague than impressions of individual identity.  Each man
recognizes his neighbor, yet there are few instances in which any one
is prepared _to give a reason_ for his recognition.  The editor of
'L'Etoile' had no right to be offended at M. Beauvais's unreasoning
belief.

"The suspicious circumstances which invest him will be found to tally
much better with my hypothesis of _romantic busybodyism_ than with
the reasoner's suggestion of guilt.  Once adopting the more
charitable interpretation, we shall find no difficulty in
comprehending the rose in the key-hole; the 'Marie' upon the slate;
the 'elbowing the male relatives out of the way'; the 'aversion to
permitting them to see the body'; the caution given to Madame B----,
that she must hold no conversation with the _gendarme_ until his
(Beauvais's) return; and, lastly, his apparent determination 'that
nobody should have anything to do with the proceedings except
himself.'  It seems to me unquestionable that Beauvais was a suitor
of Marie's; that she coquetted with him; and that he was ambitious of
being thought to enjoy her fullest intimacy and confidence.  I shall
say nothing more upon this point; and, as the evidence fully rebuts
the assertion of 'L'Etoile,' touching the matter of _apathy_ on the
part of the mother and other relatives--an apathy inconsistent with
the supposition of their believing the corpse to be that of the
perfumery girl--we shall now proceed as if the question of _identity_
were settled to our perfect satisfaction."

"And what," I here demanded, "do you think of the opinions of 'Le
Commerciel'?"

"That, in spirit, they are far more worthy of attention than any
which have been promulgated upon the subject.  The deductions from
the premises are philosophical and acute; but the premises, in two
instances, at least, are founded in imperfect observation.  'Le
Commerciel' wishes to intimate that Marie was seized by some gang of
low ruffians not far from her mother's door.  'It is impossible,' it
urges, 'that a person so well known to thousands as this young woman
was, should have passed three blocks without some one having seen
her.'  This is the idea of a man long resident in Paris--a public
man--and one whose walks to and fro in the city have been mostly
limited to the vicinity of the public offices.  He is aware that he
seldom passes so far as a dozen blocks from his own _bureau_, without
being recognized and accosted.  And, knowing the extent of his
personal acquaintance with others, and of others with him, he
compares his notoriety with that of the perfumery girl, finds no
great difference between them, and reaches at once the conclusion
that she, in her walks, would be equally liable to recognition with
himself in his.  This could only be the case were her walks of the
same unvarying, methodical character, and within the same _species_
of limited region as are his own.  He passes to and fro, at regular
intervals, within a confined periphery, abounding in individuals who
are led to observation of his person through interest in the kindred
nature of his occupation with their own.  But the walks of Marie may,
in general, be supposed discursive.  In this particular instance, it
will be understood as most probable, that she proceeded upon a route
of more than average diversity from her accustomed ones.  The
parallel which we imagine to have existed in the mind of 'Le
Commerciel' would only be sustained in the event of the two
individuals traversing the whole city.  In this case, granting the
personal acquaintance to be equal, the chances would be also equal
that an equal number of personal rencontres would be made.  For my
own part, I should hold it not only as possible, but as far more than
probable, that Marie might have proceeded, at any given period, by
any one of the many routes between her own residence and that of her
aunt, without meeting a single individual whom she knew, or by whom
she was known.  In viewing this question in its full and proper
light, we must hold steadily in mind the great disproportion between
the personal acquaintances of even the most noted individual in
Paris, and the entire population of Paris itself.

"But whatever force there may still appear to be in the suggestion of
'Le Commerciel,' will be much diminished when we take into
consideration _the hour_ at which the girl went abroad.  'It was when
the streets were full of people,' says 'Le Commerciel,' 'that she
went out.'  But not so.  It was at nine o'clock in the morning.  Now
at nine o'clock of every morning in the week, _with the exception of
Sunday_, the streets of the city are, it is true, thronged with
people.  At nine on Sunday, the populace are chiefly within doors
_preparing for church_.  No observing person can have failed to
notice the peculiarly deserted air of the town, from about eight
until ten on the morning of every Sabbath.  Between ten and eleven
the streets are thronged, but not at so early a period as that
designated.

"There is another point at which there seems a deficiency of
_observation_ on the part of 'Le Commerciel.'  'A piece,' it says,
'of one of the unfortunate girl's petticoats, two feet long, and one
foot wide, was torn out and tied under her chin, and around the back
of her head, probably to prevent screams.  This was done by fellows
who had no pocket-handkerchiefs.'  Whether this idea is or is not
well founded, we will endeavor to see hereafter; but by 'fellows who
have no pocket-handkerchiefs,' the editor intends the lowest class of
ruffians.  These, however, are the very description of people who
will always be found to have handkerchiefs even when destitute of
shirts.  You must have had occasion to observe how absolutely
indispensable, of late years, to the thorough blackguard, has become
the pocket-handkerchief."

"And what are we to think," I asked, "of the article in 'Le Soleil'?"

"That it is a vast pity its inditer was not born a parrot--in which
case he would have been the most illustrious parrot of his race.  He
has merely repeated the individual items of the already published
opinion; collecting them, with a laudable industry, from this paper
and from that.  'The things had all _evidently_ been there,' he says,
'at least three or four weeks, and there can be _no doubt_ that the
spot of this appalling outrage has been discovered.'  The facts here
restated by 'Le Soleil' are very far indeed from removing my own
doubts upon this subject, and we will examine them more particularly
hereafter in connection with another division of the theme.

"At present we must occupy ourselves with other investigations.  You
can not have failed to remark the extreme laxity of the examination
of the corpse.  To be sure, the question of identity was readily
determined, or should have been; but there were other points to be
ascertained.  Had the body been in any respect _despoiled_?  Had the
deceased any articles of jewelry about her person upon leaving home?
If so, had she any when found?  These are important questions utterly
untouched by the evidence; and there are others of equal moment,
which have met with no attention.  We must endeavor to satisfy
ourselves by personal inquiry.  The case of St. Eustache must be
reexamined.  I have no suspicion of this person; but let us proceed
methodically.  We will ascertain beyond a doubt the validity of the
_affidavits_ in regard to his whereabouts on the Sunday.  Affidavits
of this character are readily made matter of mystification.  Should
there be nothing wrong here, however, we will dismiss St. Eustache
from our investigations.  His suicide, however corroborative of
suspicion, were there found to be deceit in the affidavits, is,
without such deceit, in no respect an unaccountable circumstance, or
one which need cause us to deflect from the line of ordinary analysis.

"In that which I now propose, we will discard the interior points of
this tragedy, and concentrate our attention upon its outskirts.  Not
the least usual error in investigations such as this is the limiting
of inquiry to the immediate, with total disregard of the collateral
or circumstantial events.  It is the malpractice of the courts to
confine evidence and discussion to the bounds of apparent relevancy.
Yet experience has shown, and a true philosophy will always show,
that a vast, perhaps the larger, portion of truth arises from the
seemingly irrelevant.  It is through the spirit of this principle, if
not precisely through its letter, that modern science has resolved to
_calculate upon the unforeseen_.  But perhaps you do not comprehend
me.  The history of human knowledge has so uninterruptedly shown that
to collateral, or incidental, or accidental events we are indebted
for the most numerous and most valuable discoveries, that it has at
length become necessary, in prospective view of improvement, to make
not only large, but the largest, allowances for inventions that shall
arise by chance, and quite out of the range of ordinary expectation.
It is no longer philosophical to base upon what has been a vision of
what is to be.  _Accident_ is admitted as a portion of the
substructure.  We make chance a matter of absolute calculation.  We
subject the unlooked for and unimagined to the mathematical formul√¶
of the schools.

"I repeat that it is no more than fact that the _larger_ portion of
all truth has sprung from the collateral; and it is but in accordance
with the spirit of the principle involved in this fact that I would
divert inquiry, in the present case, from the trodden and hitherto
unfruitful ground of the event itself to the contemporary
circumstances which surround it.  While you ascertain the validity of
the affidavits, I will examine the newspapers more generally than you
have as yet done.  So far, we have only reconnoitred the field of
investigation; but it will be strange, indeed, if a comprehensive
survey, such as I propose, of the public prints will not afford us
some minute points which shall establish a _direction_ for inquiry."

In pursuance of Dupin's suggestion, I made scrupulous examination of
the affair of the affidavits.  The result was a firm conviction of
their validity, and of the consequent innocence of St. Eustache.  In
the meantime my friend occupied himself, with what seemed to me a
minuteness altogether objectless, in a scrutiny of the various
newspaper files.  At the end of a week he placed before me the
following extracts:

"About three years and a half ago, a disturbance very similar to the
present was caused by the disappearance of this same Marie Rog√™t from
the _parfumerie_ of Monsieur Le Blanc, in the Palais Royal.  At the
end of a week, however, she reappeared at her customary _comptoir_,
as well as ever, with the exception of a slight paleness not
altogether usual.  It was given out by Monsieur Le Blanc and her
mother that she had merely been on a visit to some friend in the
country; and the affair was speedily hushed up.  We presume that the
present absence is a freak of the same nature, and that, at the
expiration of a week or, perhaps, of a month, we shall have her among
us again."--Evening Paper, Monday, June 23.[17]


[17] New York "Express."


"An evening journal of yesterday refers to a former mysterious
disappearance of Mademoiselle Rog√™t.  It is well known that, during
the week of her absence from Le Blanc's _parfumerie_, she was in the
company of a young naval officer much noted for his debaucheries.  A
quarrel, it is supposed, providentially, led to her return home.  We
have the name of the Lothario in question, who is at present
stationed in Paris, but for obvious reasons forbear to make it
public."--"Le Mercurie," Tuesday Morning, June 24.[18]


[18] New York "Herald."


"An outrage of the most atrocious character was perpetrated near this
city the day before yesterday.  A gentleman, with his wife and
daughter, engaged, about dusk, the services of six young men, who
were idly rowing a boat to and fro near the banks of the Seine, to
convey him across the river.  Upon reaching the opposite shore the
three passengers stepped out, and had proceeded so far as to be
beyond the view of the boat, when the daughter discovered that she
had left in it her parasol.  She returned for it, was seized by the
gang, carried out into the stream, gagged, brutally treated, and
finally taken to the shore at a point not far from that at which she
had originally entered the boat with her parents.  The villains have
escaped for the time, but the police are upon their trail, and some
of them will soon be taken."--Morning Paper, June 25.[19]


[19] New York "Courier and Inquirer."


"We have received one or two communications, the object of which is
to fasten the crime of the late atrocity upon Mennais[20]; but as
this gentleman has been fully exonerated by a legal inquiry, and as
the arguments of our several correspondents appear to be more zealous
than profound, we do not think it advisable to make them
public."--Morning Paper, June 28.[21]


[20] Mennais was one of the parties originally suspected and
arrested, but discharged through total lack of evidence.

[21] New York "Courier and Inquirer."


"We have received several forcibly written communications, apparently
from various sources, and which go far to render it a matter of
certainty that the unfortunate Marie Rog√™t has become a victim of one
of the numerous bands of blackguards which infest the vicinity of the
city upon Sunday.  Our own opinion is decidedly in favor of this
supposition.  We shall endeavor to make room for some of these
arguments hereafter."--Evening Paper, Tuesday, June 31.[22]


[22] New York "Evening Post."


"On Monday, one of the bargemen connected with the revenue service
saw an empty boat floating down the Seine.  Sails were lying in the
bottom of the boat.  The bargeman towed it under the barge office.
The next morning it was taken from thence without the knowledge of
any of the officers.  The rudder is now at the barge office."--"Le
Diligence," Thursday, June 26.[23]


[23] New York "Standard."


Upon reading these various extracts, they not only seemed to me
irrelevant, but I could perceive no mode in which any one of them
could be brought to bear upon the matter in hand.  I waited for some
explanation from Dupin.

"It is not my present design," he said, "to _dwell_ upon the first
and second of these extracts.  I have copied them chiefly to show you
the extreme remissness of the police, who, as far as I can understand
from the Prefect, have not troubled themselves, in any respect, with
an examination of the naval officer alluded to.  Yet it is mere folly
to say that between the first and second disappearance of Marie there
is no _supposable_ connection.  Let us admit the first elopement to
have resulted in a quarrel between the lovers, and the return home of
the betrayed.  We are now prepared to view a second _elopement_ (if
we _know_ that an elopement has again taken place) as indicating a
renewal of the betrayer's advances, rather than as the result of new
proposals by a second individual--we are prepared to regard it as a
'making up' of the old _amour_, rather than as the commencement of a
new one.  The chances are ten to one that he who had once eloped with
Marie would again propose an elopement, rather than that she to whom
proposals of an elopement had been made by one individual should have
them made to her by another.  And here let me call your attention to
the fact, that the time elapsing between the first ascertained and
the second supposed elopement is a few months more than the general
period of the cruises of our men-of-war.  Had the lover been
interrupted in his first villainy by the necessity of departure to
sea, and had he seized the first moment of his return to renew the
base designs not yet altogether accomplished--or not yet altogether
accomplished _by him_?  Of all these things we know nothing.

"You will say, however, that, in the second instance, there was no
elopement as imagined.  Certainly not--but are we prepared to say
that there was not the frustrated design?  Beyond St. Eustache, and
perhaps Beauvais, we find no recognized, no open, no honorable
suitors of Marie.  Of none other is there anything said.  Who, then,
is the secret lover, of whom the relatives (_at least most of them_)
know nothing, but whom Marie meets upon the morning of Sunday, and
who is so deeply in her confidence that she hesitates not to remain
with him until the shades of the evening descend, amid the solitary
groves of the Barri√®re du Roule?  Who is that secret lover, I ask, of
whom, at least, _most_ of the relatives know nothing?  And what means
the singular prophecy of Madame Rog√™t on the morning of Marie's
departure?--'I fear that I shall never see Marie again.'

"But if we can not imagine Madame Rog√™t privy to the design of
elopement, may we not at least suppose this sign entertained by the
girl?  Upon quitting home, she gave it to be understood that she was
about to visit her aunt in the Rue des Dr√¥mes, and St. Eustache was
requested to call for her at dark.  Now, at first glance, this fact
strongly militates against my suggestion--but let us reflect.  That
she _did_ meet some companion, and proceed with him across the river,
reaching the Barri√®re du Roule at so late an hour as three o'clock in
the afternoon, is known.  But in consenting so to accompany this
individual (_for whatever purpose--to her mother known or unknown_),
she must have thought of her expressed intention when leaving home,
and of the surprise and suspicion aroused in the bosom of her
affianced suitor, St. Eustache, when, calling for her, at the hour
appointed, in the Rue des Dr√¥mes, he should find that she had not
been there, and when, moreover, upon returning to the _pension_ with
this alarming intelligence, he should become aware of her continued
absence from home.  She must have thought of these things, I say.
She must have foreseen the chagrin of St. Eustache, the suspicion of
all.  She could not have thought of returning to brave this
suspicion; but the suspicion becomes a point of trivial importance to
her, if we suppose her _not_ intending to return.

"We may imagine her thinking thus--'I am to meet a certain person for
the purpose of elopement, or for certain other purposes known only to
myself.  It is necessary that there be no chance of
interruption--there must be sufficient time given us to elude
pursuit--I will give it to be understood that I shall visit and spend
the day with my aunt at the Rue des Dr√¥mes--I will tell St. Eustache
not to call for me until dark--in this way, my absence from home for
the longest possible period, without causing suspicion or anxiety,
will be accounted for, and I shall gain more time than in any other
manner.  If I bid St. Eustache call for me at dark, he will be sure
not to call before; but if I wholly neglect to bid him call, my time
for escape will be diminished, since it will be expected that I
return the earlier, and my absence will the sooner excite anxiety.
Now, if it were my design to return _at all_--if I had in
contemplation merely a stroll with the individual in question--it
would not be my policy to bid St. Eustache call; for calling, he will
be _sure_ to ascertain that I have played him false--a fact of which
I might keep him forever in ignorance, by leaving home without
notifying him of my intention, by returning before dark, and by then
stating that I had been to visit my aunt in the Rue des Dr√¥mes.  But,
as it is my design _never_ to return--or not for some weeks--or not
until certain concealments are effected--the gaining of time is the
only point about which I need give myself any concern.'

"You have observed, in your notes, that the most general opinion in
relation to this sad affair is, and was from the first, that the girl
had been the victim of a _gang_ of blackguards.  Now, the popular
opinion, under certain conditions, is not to be disregarded.  When
arising of itself--when manifesting itself in a strictly spontaneous
manner--we should look upon it as analogous with that _intuition_
which is the idiosyncrasy of the individual man of genius.  In
ninety-nine cases from the hundred I would abide by its decision.
But it is important that we find no palpable traces of _suggestion_.
The opinion must be rigorously _the public's own_; and the
distinction is often exceedingly difficult to perceive and to
maintain.  In the present instance, it appears to me that this
'public opinion,' in respect to a _gang_, has been superinduced by
the collateral event which is detailed in the third of my extracts.
All Paris is excited by the discovered corpse of Marie, a girl young,
beautiful, and notorious.  This corpse is found bearing marks of
violence, and floating in the river.  But it is now made known that,
at the very period, or about the very period, in which it is supposed
that the girl was assassinated, an outrage similar in nature to that
endured by the deceased, although less in extent, was perpetrated by
a gang of young ruffians upon the person of a second young female.
Is it wonderful that the one known atrocity should influence the
popular judgment in regard to the other unknown?  This judgment
awaited direction, and the known outrage seemed so opportunely to
afford it!  Marie, too, was found in the river; and upon this very
river was this known outrage committed.  The connection of the two
events had about it so much of the palpable, that the true wonder
would have been a _failure_ of the populace to appreciate and to
seize it.  But, in fact, the one atrocity, known to be so committed,
is, if anything, evidence that the other, committed at a time nearly
coincident, was not so committed.  It _would_ have been a miracle if,
while a gang of ruffians were perpetrating, at a given locality, a
most unheard-of wrong, there should have been another similar gang,
in a similar locality, in the same city, under the same
circumstances, with the same means and appliances, engaged in a wrong
of precisely the same aspect, at precisely the same period of time!
Yet in what, if not in this marvelous train of coincidence, does the
accidentally _suggested_ opinion of the populace call upon us to
believe?

"Before proceeding further, let us consider the supposed scene of the
assassination, in the thicket at the Barri√®re du Roule.  This
thicket, although dense, was in the close vicinity of a public road.
Within were three or four large stones, forming a kind of seat with a
back and a footstool.  On the upper stone was discovered a white
petticoat; on the second, a silk scarf.  A parasol, gloves, and a
pocket-handkerchief were also here found.  The handkerchief bore the
name 'Marie Rog√™t.'  Fragments of dress were seen on the branches
around.  The earth was trampled, the bushes were broken, and there
was every evidence of a violent struggle.

"Notwithstanding the acclamation with which the discovery of this
thicket was received by the press, and the unanimity with which it
was supposed to indicate the precise scene of the outrage, it must be
admitted that there was some very good reason for doubt.  That it
_was_ the scene, I may or I may not believe--but there was excellent
reason for doubt.  Had the _true_ scene been, as 'Le Commerciel'
suggested, in the neighborhood of the Rue Pav√©e St. Andr√©e, the
perpetrators of the crime, supposing them still resident in Paris,
would naturally have been stricken with terror at the public
attention thus acutely directed into the proper channel; and, in
certain classes of minds, there would have arisen, at once, a sense
of the necessity of some exertion to redivert this attention.  And
thus, the thicket of the Barri√®re du Roule having been already
suspected, the idea of placing the articles where they were found
might have been naturally entertained.  There is no real evidence,
although 'Le Soleil' so supposes, that the articles discovered had
been more than a very few days in the thicket; while there is much
circumstantial proof that they could not have remained there, without
attracting attention, during the twenty days elapsing between the
fatal Sunday and the afternoon upon which they were found by the
boys.  'They were all _mildewed_ down hard,' says 'Le Soleil,'
adopting the opinions of its predecessors, 'with the action of the
rain and stuck together from mildew.  The grass had grown around and
over some of them.  The silk of the parasol was strong, but the
threads of it were run together within.  The upper part, where it had
been doubled and folded, was all _mildewed_ and rotten, and tore on
being opened.'  In respect to the grass having 'grown around and over
some of them,' it is obvious that the fact could only have been
ascertained from the words, and thus from the recollections, of two
small boys; for these boys removed the articles and took them home
before they had been seen by a third party.  But the grass will grow,
especially in warm and damp weather (such as was that of the period
of the murder), as much as two or three inches in a single day.  A
parasol lying upon a newly turfed ground, might, in a single week, be
entirely concealed from sight by the upspringing grass.  And touching
that _mildew_ upon which the editor of 'Le Soleil' so pertinaciously
insists that he employs the word no less than three times in the
brief paragraph just quoted, is he really unaware of the nature of
this mildew?  Is he to be told that it is one of the many classes of
_fungus_, of which the most ordinary feature is its upspringing and
decadence within twenty-four hours?

"Thus we see, at a glance, that what has been most triumphantly
adduced in support of the idea that the articles had been 'for at
least three or four weeks' in the thicket, is most absurdly null as
regards any evidence of that fact.  On the other hand, it is
exceedingly difficult to believe that these articles could have
remained in the thicket specified for a longer period than a single
week--for a longer period than from one Sunday to the next.  Those
who know anything of the vicinity of Paris know the extreme
difficulty of finding seclusion, unless at a great distance from its
suburbs.  Such a thing as an unexplored or even an unfrequently
visited recess, amid its woods or groves, is not for a moment to be
imagined.  Let any one who, being at heart a lover of nature, is yet
chained by duty to the dust and heat of this great metropolis--let
any such one attempt, even during the week-days, to slake his thirst
for solitude amid the scenes of natural loveliness which immediately
surround us.  At every second step he will find the growing charm
dispelled by the voice and personal intrusion of some ruffian or
party of carousing blackguards.  He will seek privacy amid the
densest foliage, all in vain.  Here are the very nooks where the
unwashed most abound--here are the temples most desecrate.  With
sickness of the heart the wanderer will flee back to the polluted
Paris as to a less odious because less incongruous sink of pollution.
But if the vicinity of the city is so beset during the working days
of the week, how much more so on the Sabbath!  It is now especially
that, released from the claims of labor, or deprived of the customary
opportunities of crime, the town blackguard seeks the precincts of
the town, not through love of the rural, which in his heart he
despises, but by way of escape from the restraints and
conventionalities of society.  He desires less the fresh air and the
green trees, than the utter license of the country.  Here, at the
roadside inn, or beneath the foliage of the woods, he indulges
unchecked by any eye except those of his boon companions, in all the
mad excess of a counterfeit hilarity--the joint offspring of liberty
and of rum.  I say nothing more than what must be obvious to every
dispassionate observer, when I repeat that the circumstance of the
articles in question having remained undiscovered for a longer period
than from one Sunday to another in any thicket in the immediate
neighborhood of Paris is to be looked upon as little less than
miraculous.

"But there are not wanting other grounds for the suspicion that the
articles were placed in the thicket with the view of diverting
attention from the real scene of the outrage.  And first, let me
direct your notice to the date of the discovery of the articles.
Collate this with the date of the fifth extract made by myself from
the newspapers.  You will find that the discovery followed, almost
immediately, the urgent communications sent to the evening paper.
These communications, although various, and apparently from various
sources, tended all to the same point--viz.: the directing of
attention to a gang as the perpetrators of the outrage, and to the
neighborhood of the Barri√®re du Roule as its scene.  Now, here, of
course, the situation is not that, in consequence of these
communications, or of the public attention by them directed, the
articles were found by the boys; but the suspicion might and may well
have been that the articles were not before found by the boys, for
the reason that the articles had not before been in the thicket;
having been deposited there only at so late a period as at the date,
or shortly prior to the date of the communication, by the guilty
authors of these communications themselves.

"This thicket was a singular--an exceedingly singular one.  It was
unusually dense.  Within its naturally walled inclosure were three
extraordinary stones, _forming a seat with a back and a footstool_.
And this thicket, so full of art, was in the immediate vicinity,
_within a few rods_, of the dwelling of Madame Deluc, whose boys were
in the habit of closely examining the shrubberies about them in
search of the bark of the sassafras.  Would it be a rash wager--a
wager of one thousand to one--that a _day_ never passed over the
heads of these boys without finding at least one of them ensconced in
the umbrageous hall, and enthroned upon its natural throne?  Those
who would hesitate at such a wager have either never been boys
themselves or have forgotten the boyish nature.  I repeat--it is
exceedingly hard to comprehend how the articles could have remained
in this thicket undiscovered for a longer period than one or two
days; and that thus there is good ground for suspicion, in spite of
the dogmatic ignorance of 'Le Soleil,' that they were, at a
comparatively late date, deposited where found.

"But there are still other and stronger reasons for believing them so
deposited, than any which I have as yet urged.  And, now, let me beg
your notice to the highly artificial arrangement of the articles.  On
the _upper_ stone lay a white petticoat; on the _second_ a silk
scarf; scattered around were a parasol, gloves, and a
pocket-handkerchief bearing the name 'Marie Rog√™t.'  Here is just
such an arrangement as would naturally be made by a not overacute
person wishing to dispose the articles naturally.  But it is by no
means a really natural arrangement.  I should rather have looked to
see the things _all_ lying on the ground and trampled under foot.  In
the narrow limits of that bower it would have been scarcely possible
that the petticoat and scarf should have retained a position upon the
stones, when subjected to the brushing to and fro of many struggling
persons.  'There was evidence,' it is said, 'of a struggle; and the
earth was trampled, the bushes were broken'--but the petticoat and
the scarf are found deposited as if upon shelves.  'The pieces of the
frock torn out by the bushes were about three inches wide and six
inches long.  One part was the hem of the frock, and it had been
mended.  They _looked like strips torn off_.'  Here, inadvertently,
'Le Soleil' has employed an exceedingly suspicious phrase.  The
pieces, as described, do indeed 'look like strips torn off'; but
purposely and by hand.  It is one of the rarest of accidents that a
piece is 'torn off,' from any garment such as is now in question, by
the agency _of a thorn_.  From the very nature of such fabrics, a
thorn or nail becoming tangled in them, tears them
rectangularly--divides them into two longitudinal rents, at right
angles with each other, and meeting at an apex where the thorn
enters--but it is scarcely possible to conceive the piece 'torn off.'
I never so knew it, nor did you.  To tear a piece _off_ from such
fabric, two distinct forces, in different directions, will be, in
almost every case, required.  If there be two edges to the
fabric--if, for example, it be a pocket-handkerchief, and it is
desired to tear from it a slip, then, and then only, will the one
force serve the purpose.  But in the present case the question is of
a dress, presenting but one edge.  To tear a piece from the interior,
where no edge is presented, could only be effected by a miracle
through the agency of thorns, and no _one_ thorn could accomplish it.
But, even where an edge is presented, two thorns will be necessary,
operating, the one in two distinct directions, and the other in one.
And this in the supposition that the edge is unhemmed.  If hemmed,
the matter is nearly out of the question.  We thus see the numerous
and great obstacles in the way of pieces being 'torn off' through the
simple agency of 'thorns'; yet we are required to believe not only
that one piece but that many have been so torn.  'And one part,' too,
'_was the hem of the frock!_'  Another piece was '_part of the skirt,
not the hem_'--that is to say, was torn completely out, through the
agency of thorns, from the unedged interior of the dress!  These, I
say, are things which one may well be pardoned for disbelieving; yet,
taken collectedly, they form, perhaps, less of reasonable ground for
suspicion than the one startling circumstance of the articles having
been left in this thicket at all, by any _murderers_ who had enough
precaution to think of removing the corpse.  You will not have
apprehended me rightly, however, if you suppose it my design to
_deny_ this thicket as the scene of the outrage.  There might have
been a wrong _here_, or more possibly an accident at Madame Deluc's.
But, in fact, this is a point of minor importance.  We are not
engaged in an attempt to discover the scene, but to produce the
perpetrators of the murder.  What I have adduced, notwithstanding the
minuteness with which I have adduced it, has been with the view,
first, to show the folly of the positive and headlong assertions of
'Le Soleil,' but secondly, and chiefly, to bring you, by the most
natural route, to a further contemplation of the doubt whether this
assassination has, or has not, been the work of a _gang_.

"We will resume this question by mere allusion to the revolting
details of the surgeon examined at the inquest.  It is only necessary
to say that his published _inferences_, in regard to the number of
the ruffians, have been properly ridiculed as unjust and totally
baseless, by all the reputable anatomists of Paris.  Not that the
matter _might not_ have been as inferred, but that there was no
ground for the inference--was there not much for another?

"Let us reflect now upon 'the traces of a struggle'; and let me ask
what these traces have been supposed to demonstrate.  A gang.  But do
they not rather demonstrate the absence of a gang?  What _struggle_
could have taken place--what struggle so violent and so enduring as
to have left its 'traces' in all directions--between a weak and
defenseless girl and a _gang_ of ruffians imagined?  The silent grasp
of a few rough arms and all would have been over.  The victim must
have been absolutely passive at their will.  You will here bear in
mind that the arguments urged against the thicket as the scene, are
applicable, in chief part, only against it as the scene of an outrage
committed by _more than a single individual_.  If we imagine but one
violator, we can conceive, and thus only conceive, the struggle of so
violent and so obstinate a nature as to have left the 'traces'
apparent.

"And again.  I have already mentioned the suspicion to be excited by
the fact that the articles in question were suffered to remain _at
all_ in the thicket where discovered.  It seems almost impossible
that these evidences of guilt should have been accidentally left
where found.  There was sufficient presence of mind (it is supposed)
to remove the corpse; and yet a more positive evidence than the
corpse itself (whose features might have been quickly obliterated by
decay) is allowed to lie conspicuously in the scene of the outrage--I
allude to the handkerchief with the _name_ of the deceased.  If this
was accident, it was not the accident _of a gang_.  We can imagine it
only the accident of an individual.  Let us see.  An individual has
committed the murder.  He is alone with the ghost of the departed.
He is appalled by what lies motionless before him.  The fury of his
passion is over, and there is abundant room in his heart for the
natural awe of the deed.  His is none of that confidence which the
presence of numbers inevitably inspires.  He is _alone_ with the
dead.  He trembles and is bewildered.  Yet there is a necessity for
disposing of the corpse.  He bears it to the river, and leaves behind
him the other evidences of his guilt; for it is difficult, if not
impossible, to carry all the burden at once, and it will be easy to
return for what is left.  But in his toilsome journey to the water
his fears redouble within him.  The sounds of life encompass his
path.  A dozen times he hears or fancies he hears the step of an
observer.  Even the very lights from the city bewilder him.  Yet, in
time, and by long and frequent pauses of deep agony, he reaches the
river's brink, and disposes of his ghastly charge--perhaps through
the medium of a boat.  But _now_ what treasure does the world
hold--what threat of vengeance could it hold out--which would have
power to urge the return of that lonely murderer over that toilsome
and perilous path, to the thicket and its blood-chilling
recollections?  He returns _not_, let the consequences be what they
may.  He _could_ not return if he would.  His sole thought is
immediate escape.  He turns his back _forever_ upon those dreadful
shrubberies, and flees as from the wrath to come.

"But how with a gang?  Their number would have inspired them with
confidence; if, indeed, confidence is ever wanting in the breast of
the arrant blackguard; and of arrant blackguards alone are the
supposed _gangs_ ever constituted.  Their number, I say, would have
prevented the bewildering and unreasoning terror which I have
imagined to paralyze the single man.  Could we suppose an oversight
in one, or two, or three, this oversight would have been remedied by
a fourth.  They would have left nothing behind them; for their number
would have enabled them to carry _all_ at once.  There would have
been no need of _return_.

"Consider now the circumstance that, in the outer garment of the
corpse when found, 'a slip, about a foot wide, had been torn upward
from the bottom hem to the waist, wound three times round the waist,
and secured by a sort of hitch in the back.'  This was done with the
obvious design of affording a _handle_ by which to carry the body.
But would any _number_ of men have dreamed of resorting to such an
expedient?  To three or four, the limbs of the corpse would have
afforded not only a sufficient, but the best possible, hold.  The
device is that of a single individual; and this brings us to the fact
that 'between the thicket and the river the rails of the fences were
found taken down, and the ground bore evident traces of some heavy
burden having been dragged along it!'  But would a _number_ of men
have put themselves to the superfluous trouble of taking down a
fence, for the purpose of dragging through it a corpse which they
might have _lifted over_ any fence in an instant?  Would a _number_
of men have so _dragged_ a corpse at all as to have left evident
_traces_ of the dragging?

"And here we must refer to an observation of 'Le Commerciel'; upon
which I have already, in some measure, commented.  'A piece,' says
this journal, 'of one of the unfortunate girl's petticoats was torn
out and tied under her chin, and around the back of her head,
probably to prevent screams.  This was done by fellows who had no
pocket-handkerchiefs.'

"I have before suggested that a genuine blackguard is never _without_
a pocket-handkerchief.  But it is not to this fact that I now
especially advert.  That it was not through want of a handkerchief
for the purpose imagined by 'Le Commerciel,' that this bandage was
employed, is rendered apparent by the handkerchief left in the
thicket; and that the object was not 'to prevent screams' appears,
also, from the bandage having been employed in preference to what
would so much better have answered the purpose.  But the language of
the evidence speaks of the strip in question as 'found around the
neck, fitting loosely, and secured with a hard knot.'  These words
are sufficiently vague, but differ materially from those of 'Le
Commerciel.'  The slip was eighteen inches wide, and therefore,
although of muslin, would form a strong band when folded or rumpled
longitudinally.  And thus rumpled it was discovered.  My inference is
this.  The solitary murderer, having borne the corpse for some
distance (whether from the thicket or elsewhere) by means of the
bandage _hitched_ around its middle, found the weight, in this mode
of procedure, too much for his strength.  He resolved to drag the
burden--the evidence goes to show that it _was_ dragged.  With this
object in view, it became necessary to attach something like a rope
to one of the extremities.  It could be best attached about the neck,
where the head would prevent its slipping off.  And now the murderer
bethought him, unquestionably, of the bandage about the loins.  He
would have used this, but for its volution about the corpse, the
_hitch_ which embarrassed it, and the reflection that it had not been
'torn off' from the garment.  It was easier to tear a new slip from
the petticoat.  He tore it, made it fast about the neck, and so
_dragged_ his victim to the brink of the river.  That this 'bandage,'
only attainable with trouble and delay, and but imperfectly answering
its purpose--that this bandage was employed _at all_, demonstrates
that the necessity for its employment sprang from circumstances
arising at a period when the handkerchief was no longer
attainable--that is to say, arising, as we have imagined, after
quitting the thicket (if the thicket it was), and on the road between
the thicket and the river.

"But the evidence, you will say, of Madame Deluc (!) points
especially to the presence of _a gang_ in the vicinity of the
thicket, at or about the epoch of the murder.  This I grant.  I doubt
if there were not a _dozen gangs_, such as described by Madame Deluc,
in and about the vicinity of the Barri√®re du Roule at _or about_ the
period of this tragedy.  But the gang which has drawn upon itself the
pointed animadversion, through the somewhat tardy and very suspicious
evidence, of Madame Deluc, is the _only_ gang which is represented by
that honest and scrupulous old lady as having eaten her cakes and
swallowed her brandy, without putting themselves to the trouble of
making her payment.  _Et hinc ill√¶ ir√¶?_

"But what _is_ the precise evidence of Madame Deluc?  'A gang of
miscreants made their appearance, behaved boisterously, ate and drank
without making payment, followed in the route of the young man and
the girl, returned to the inn _about dusk_, and recrossed the river
as if in great haste.'

"Now this 'great haste' very possibly seemed _greater_ haste in the
eyes of Madame Deluc, since she dwelt lingeringly and lamentingly
upon her violated cakes and ale--cakes and ale for which she might
still have entertained a faint hope of compensation.  Why, otherwise,
since it was _about dusk_, should she make a point of the _haste_?
It is no cause for wonder, surely, that even a gang of blackguards
should make _haste_ to get home when a wide river is to be crossed in
small boats, when storm impends, and when night _approaches_.

"I say _approaches_; for the night had _not yet arrived_.  It was
only _about dusk_ that the indecent haste of these 'miscreants'
offended the sober eyes of Madame Deluc.  But we are told that it was
upon this very evening that Madame Deluc, as well as her eldest son,
'heard the screams of a female in the vicinity of the inn.'  And in
what words does Madame Deluc designate the period of the evening at
which these screams were heard?  'It was _soon after dark_' she says.
But 'soon _after_ dark' is, at least, _dark_; and '_about dusk_,' is
as certainly daylight.  Thus it is abundantly clear that the gang
quitted the Barri√®re du Roule _prior_ to the screams overheard (?) by
Madame Deluc.  And although, in all the many reports of the evidence,
the relative expressions in question are distinctly and invariably
employed just as I have employed them in this conversation with
yourself, no notice whatever of the gross discrepancy has, as yet,
been taken by any of the public journals, or by any of the myrmidons
of police.

"I shall add but one to the arguments against _a gang_; but this
_one_ has, to my own understanding at least, a weight altogether
irresistible.  Under the circumstances of large reward offered, and
full pardon to any king's evidence, it is not to be imagined, for a
moment, that some member of _a gang_ of low ruffians, or of any body
of men, would not long ago have betrayed his accomplices.  Each one
of a gang, so placed, is not so much greedy of reward, or anxious for
escape, as _fearful of betrayal_.  He betrays eagerly and early that
_he may not himself be betrayed_.  That the secret has not been
divulged is the very best of proof that it is, in fact, a secret.
The horrors of this dark deed are known only to _one_ or two living
human beings, and to God.

"Let us sum up now the meagre yet certain fruits of our long
analysis.  We have attained the idea either of a fatal accident under
the roof of Madame Deluc, or of a murder perpetrated, in the thicket
at the Barri√®re du Roule, by a lover, or at least by an intimate and
secret associate of the deceased.  This associate is of swarthy
complexion.  This complexion, the 'hitch' in the bandage, and the
'sailor's knot' with which the bonnet-ribbon is tied, point to a
seaman.  His companionship with the deceased--a gay but not an abject
young girl--designates him as above the grade of the common sailor.
Here the well-written and urgent communications to the journals are
much in the way of corroboration.  The circumstance of the first
elopement, as mentioned by 'Le Mercurie,' tends to blend the idea of
this seaman with that of the 'naval officer' who is first known to
have led the unfortunate into crime.

"And here, most fitly, comes the consideration of the continued
absence of him of the dark complexion.  Let me pause to observe that
the complexion of this man is dark and swarthy; it was no common
swarthiness which constituted the _sole_ point of remembrance, both
as regards Valence and Madame Deluc.  But why is this man absent?
Was he murdered by the gang?  If so, why are there only _traces_ of
the assassinated _girl_?  The scene of the two outrages will
naturally be supposed identical.  And where is his corpse?  The
assassins would most probably have disposed of both in the same way.
But it may be said that this man lives, and is deterred from making
himself known, through dread of being charged with the murder.  This
consideration might be supposed to operate upon him now--at this late
period--since it has been given in evidence that he was seen with
Marie, but it would have had no force at the period of the deed.  The
first impulse of an innocent man would have been to announce the
outrage, and to aid in identifying the ruffians.  This _policy_ would
have suggested.  He had been seen with the girl.  He had crossed the
river with her in an open ferry-boat.  The denouncing of the
assassins would have appeared, even to an idiot, the surest and sole
means of relieving himself from suspicion.  We can not suppose him,
on the night of the fatal Sunday, both innocent himself and
incognizant of an outrage committed.  Yet only under such
circumstances is it possible to imagine that he would have failed, if
alive, in the denouncement of the assassins.

"And what means are ours of attaining the truth?  We shall find these
means multiplying and gathering distinctness as we proceed.  Let us
sift to the bottom this affair of the first elopement.  Let us know
the full history of 'the officer,' with his present circumstances,
and his whereabout at the precise period of the murder.  Let us
carefully compare with each other the various communications sent to
the evening paper, in which the object was to inculpate _a gang_.
This done, let us compare these communications, both as regards style
and MS., with those sent to the morning paper, at a previous period,
and insisting so vehemently upon the guilt of Mennais.  And, all this
done, let us again compare these various communications with the
known MSS. of the officer.  Let us endeavor to ascertain, by repeated
questionings of Madame Deluc and her boys, as well as of the
omnibus-driver, Valence, something more of the personal appearance
and bearing of the 'man of dark complexion.'  Queries, skilfully
directed, will not fail to elicit, from some of these parties,
information on this particular point (or upon others)--information
which the parties themselves may not even be aware of possessing.
And let us now trace _the boat_ picked up by the bargeman on the
morning of Monday the twenty-third of June, and which was removed
from the barge-office, without the cognizance of the officer in
attendance, and _without the rudder_, at some period prior to the
discovery of the corpse.  With a proper caution and perseverance we
shall infallibly trace this boat; for not only can the bargeman who
picked it up identify it, but the _rudder is at hand_.  The rudder of
a _sail boat_ would not have been abandoned, without inquiry, by one
altogether at ease in heart.  And here let me pause to insinuate a
question.  There was no _advertisement_ of the picking up of this
boat.  It was silently taken to the barge-office and as silently
removed.  But its owner or employer--how _happened_ he, at so early a
period as Tuesday morning, to be informed, without the agency of
advertisement, of the locality of the boat taken up on Monday, unless
we imagine some connection with the _navy_--some personal permanent
connection leading to cognizance of its minute interests--its petty
local news?

"In speaking of the lonely assassin dragging his burden to the shore,
I have already suggested the probability of his availing himself _of
a boat_.  Now we are to understand that Marie Rog√™t _was_
precipitated from a boat.  This would naturally have been the case.
The corpse could not have been trusted to the shallow waters of the
shore.  The peculiar marks on the back and shoulders of the victim
tell of the bottom ribs of a boat.  That the body was found without
weight is also corroborative of the idea.  If thrown from the shore a
weight would have been attached.  We can only account for its absence
by supposing the murderer to have neglected the precaution of
supplying himself with it before pushing off.  In the act of
consigning the corpse to the water, he would unquestionably have
noticed his oversight; but then no remedy would have been at hand.
Any risk would have been preferred to a return to that accursed
shore.  Having rid himself of his ghastly charge, the murderer would
have hastened to the city.  There, at some obscure wharf, he would
have leaped on land.  But the boat--would he have secured it?  He
would have been in too great haste for such things as securing a
boat.  Moreover, in fastening it to the wharf, he would have felt as
if securing evidence against himself.  His natural thought would have
been to cast from him, as far as possible, all that had held
connection with his crime.  He would not only have fled from the
wharf, but he would not have permitted _the boat_ to remain.
Assuredly he would have cast it adrift.  Let us pursue our fancies.
In the morning, the wretch is stricken with unutterable horror at
finding that the boat has been picked up and detained at a locality
which he is in the daily habit of frequenting--at a locality,
perhaps, which his duty compels him to frequent.  The next night,
_without daring to ask for the rudder_, he removes it.  Now _where_
is that rudderless boat?  Let it be one of our first purposes to
discover.  With the first glimpse we obtain of it, the dawn of our
success shall begin.  This boat shall guide us, with a rapidity which
will surprise even ourselves, to him who employed it in the midnight
of the fatal Sabbath.  Corroboration will rise upon corroboration,
and the murderer will be traced."

[For reasons which we shall not specify, but which to many readers
will appear obvious, we have taken the liberty of here omitting, from
the MSS. placed in our hands, such portion as details the _following
up_ of the apparently slight clue obtained by Dupin.  We feel it
advisable only to state, in brief, that the result desired was
brought to pass; and that the Prefect fulfilled punctually, although
with reluctance, the terms of his compact with the Chevalier.  Mr.
Poe's article concludes with the following words.--_Eds._[24]]


[24] Of the Magazine in which the article was originally published.


It will be understood that I speak of coincidences and _no more_.
What I have said above upon this topic must suffice.  In my own heart
there dwells no faith in preternature.  That Nature and its God are
two, no man who thinks will deny.  That the latter, creating the
former, can, at will, control or modify it, is also unquestionable.
I say "at will"; for the question is of will, and not, as the
insanity of logic has assumed, of power.  It is not that the Deity
_can not_ modify his laws, but that we insult him in imagining a
possible necessity for modification.  In their origin these laws were
fashioned to embrace _all_ contingencies which _could_ lie in the
Future.  With God all is _Now_.

I repeat, then, that I speak of these things only as of coincidences.
And further: in what I relate it will be seen that between the fate
of the unhappy Mary Cecilia Rogers, so far as that fate is known, and
the fate of one Marie Rog√™t up to a certain epoch in her history,
there has existed a parallel in the contemplation of whose wonderful
exactitude the reason becomes embarrassed.  I say all this will be
seen.  But let it not for a moment be supposed that, in proceeding
with the sad narrative of Marie from the epoch just mentioned, and in
tracing to its _denouement_ the mystery which enshrouded her, it is
my covert design to hint at an extension of the parallel, or even to
suggest that the measures adopted in Paris for the discovery of the
assassin of a grisette, or measures founded in any similar
ratiocination, would produce any similar result.

For, in respect to the latter branch of the supposition, it should be
considered that the most trifling variation in the facts of the two
cases might give rise to the most important miscalculations, by
diverting thoroughly the two courses of events; very much as, in
arithmetic, an error which, in its own individuality, may be
inappreciable, produces, at length, by dint of multiplication at all
points of the process, a result enormously at variance with truth.
And, in regard to the former branch, we must not fail to hold in view
that the very Calculus of Probabilities to which I have referred,
forbids all idea of the extension of the parallel--forbids it with a
positiveness strong and decided just in proportion as this parallel
has already been long-drawn and exact.  This is one of those
anomalous propositions which, seemingly appealing to thought
altogether apart from the mathematical, is yet one which only the
mathematician can fully entertain.  Nothing, for example, is more
difficult than to convince the merely general reader that the fact of
sixes having been thrown twice in succession by a player at dice, is
sufficient cause for betting the largest odds that sixes will not be
thrown in the third attempt.  A suggestion to this effect is usually
rejected by the intellect at once.  It does not appear that the two
throws which have been completed, and which lie now absolutely in the
Past, can have influence upon the throw which exists only in the
Future.  The chance for throwing sixes seems to be precisely as it
was at any ordinary time--that is to say, subject only to the
influence of the various other throws which may be made by the dice.
And this is a reflection which appears so exceedingly obvious that
attempts to controvert it are received more frequently with a
derisive smile than with anything like respectful attention.  The
error here involved--a gross error redolent of mischief--I can not
pretend to expose within the limits assigned me at present; with the
philosophical it needs no exposure.  It may be sufficient here to say
that it forms one of an infinite series of mistakes which arise in
the path of Reason through her propensity for seeking truth in
_detail_.




THE PURLOINED LETTER

BY EDGAR ALLAN POE

_This story, as may be seen from the opening paragraph, also concerns
itself with that remarkable detective, M. Dupin._

_Edmund Clarence Stedman considers it superior to the two stories
that precede it, but Brander Matthews says that nothing better of
their kind has ever been done than "The Murders in the Rue Morgue"
and "The Purloined Letter"; thus awarding equal praise to the first
story and the third story._



THE PURLOINED LETTER

By EDGAR ALLAN POE

Nil sapienti√¶ odiosius acumine nimio.--_Seneca_

At Paris, just after dark one gusty evening in the autumn of 18--, I
was enjoying the twofold luxury of meditation and a meerschaum, in
company with my friend, C. Auguste Dupin, in his little back library,
or book-closet, _au troisieme_, No. 33 _Rue Dunot_, _Faubourg St.
Germain_.  For one hour at least we had maintained a profound
silence; while each, to any casual observer, might have seemed
intently and exclusively occupied with the curling eddies of smoke
that oppressed the atmosphere of the chamber.  For myself, however, I
was mentally discussing certain topics which had formed matter for
conversation between us at an earlier period of the evening; I mean
the affair of the Rue Morgue, and the mystery attending the murder of
Marie Rog√™t.  I looked upon it, therefore, as something of a
coincidence, when the door of our apartment was thrown open and
admitted our old acquaintance, Monsieur G----, the Prefect of the
Parisian police.

We gave him a hearty welcome; for there was nearly half as much of
the entertaining as of the contemptible about the man, and we had not
seen him for several years.  We had been sitting in the dark, and
Dupin now arose for the purpose of lighting a lamp, but sat down
again, without doing so, upon G----'s saying that he had called to
consult us, or rather to ask the opinion of my friend, about some
official business which had occasioned a great deal of trouble.

"If it is any point requiring reflection," observed Dupin, as he
forebore to enkindle the wick, "we shall examine it to better purpose
in the dark."

"That is another of your odd notions," said the Prefect, who had the
fashion of calling everything "odd" that was beyond his
comprehension, and thus lived amid an absolute legion of "oddities."

"Very true," said Dupin, as he supplied his visitor with a pipe, and
rolled toward him a comfortable chair.

"And what is the difficulty now?" I asked.  "Nothing more in the
assassination way, I hope?"

"Oh, no; nothing of that nature.  The fact is, the business is _very_
simple indeed, and I make no doubt that we can manage it sufficiently
well ourselves; but then I thought Dupin would like to hear the
details of it, because it is so excessively _odd_."

"Simple and odd!" said Dupin.

"Why, yes; and not exactly that either.  The fact is, we have all
been a good deal puzzled because the affair _is_ so simple, and yet
baffles us altogether."

"Perhaps it is the very simplicity of the thing which puts you at
fault," said my friend.

"What nonsense you _do_ talk!" replied the Prefect, laughing heartily.

"Perhaps the mystery is a little _too_ plain," said Dupin.

"Oh, good heavens! who ever heard of such an idea?"

"A little _too_ self-evident."

"Ha! ha! ha!--ha! ha! ha!--ho! ho! ho!" roared our visitor,
profoundly amused, "oh, Dupin, you will be the death of me yet!"

"And what, after all, _is_ the matter on hand?" I asked.

"Why, I will tell you," replied the Prefect, as he gave a long,
steady, and contemplative puff, and settled himself in his chair.  "I
will tell you in a few words; but, before I begin, let me caution you
that this is an affair demanding the greatest secrecy, and that I
should most probably lose the position I now hold, were it known that
I confided it to any one."

"Proceed," said I.

"Or not," said Dupin.

"Well, then; I have received personal information, from a very high
quarter, that a certain document of the last importance has been
purloined from the royal apartments.  The individual who purloined it
is known; this beyond a doubt; he was seen to take it.  It is known,
also, that it still remains in his possession."

"How is this known?" asked Dupin.

"It is clearly inferred," replied the Prefect, "from the nature of
the document, and from the non-appearance of certain results which
would at once arise from its passing out of the robber's
possession--that is to say, from his employing it as he must design
in the end to employ it."

"Be a little more explicit," I said.

"Well, I may venture so far as to say that the paper gives its holder
a certain power in a certain quarter where such power is immensely
valuable."  The Prefect was fond of the cant of diplomacy.

"Still I do not quite understand," said Dupin.

"No?  Well; the disclosure of the document to a third person, who
shall be nameless, would bring in question the honor of a personage
of most exalted station; and this fact gives the holder of the
document an ascendency over the illustrious personage whose honor and
peace are so jeopardized."

"But this ascendency," I interposed, "would depend upon the robber's
knowledge of the loser's knowledge of the robber.  Who would dare--"

"The thief," said G----, "is the Minister D----, who dares all
things, those unbecoming as well as those becoming a man.  The method
of the theft was not less ingenious than bold.  The document in
question--a letter, to be frank--had been received by the personage
robbed while alone in the royal _boudoir_.  During its perusal she
was suddenly interrupted by the entrance of the other exalted
personage from whom especially it was her wish to conceal it.  After
a hurried and vain endeavor to thrust it in a drawer, she was forced
to place it, open as it was, upon a table.  The address, however, was
uppermost, and, the contents thus unexposed, the letter escaped
notice.  At this juncture enters the Minister D----.  His lynx eye
immediately perceives the paper, recognizes the handwriting of the
address, observes the confusion of the personage addressed, and
fathoms her secret.  After some business transactions, hurried
through in his ordinary manner, he produces a letter somewhat similar
to the one in question, opens it, pretends to read it, and then
places it in close juxtaposition to the other.  Again he converses,
for some fifteen minutes, upon the public affairs.  At length, in
taking leave, he takes also from the table the letter to which he had
no claim.  Its rightful owner saw, but, of course, dared not call
attention to the act, in the presence of the third personage who
stood at her elbow.  The minister decamped; leaving his own
letter--one of no importance--upon the table."

"Here, then," said Dupin to me, "you have precisely what you demand
to make the ascendency complete--the robber's knowledge of the
loser's knowledge of the robber."

"Yes," replied the Prefect; "and the power thus attained has, for
some months past, been wielded, for political purposes, to a very
dangerous extent.  The personage robbed is more thoroughly convinced,
every day, of the necessity of reclaiming her letter.  But this, of
course, can not be done openly.  In fine, driven to despair, she has
committed the matter to me."

"Than whom," said Dupin, amid a perfect whirlwind of smoke, "no more
sagacious agent could, I suppose, be desired, or even imagined."

"You flatter me," replied the Prefect; "but it is possible that some
such opinion may have been entertained."

"It is clear," said I, "as you observe, that the letter is still in
the possession of the minister; since it is this possession, and not
any employment of the letter, which bestows the power.  With the
employment the power departs."

"True," said G----; "and upon this conviction I proceeded.  My first
care was to make thorough search of the minister's hotel; and here my
chief embarrassment lay in the necessity of searching without his
knowledge.  Beyond all things, I have been warned of the danger which
would result from giving him reason to suspect our design."

"But," said I, "you are quite _au fait_ in these investigations.  The
Parisian police have done this thing often before."

"Oh, yes; and for this reason I did not despair.  The habits of the
minister gave me, too, a great advantage.  He is frequently absent
from home all night.  His servants are by no means numerous.  They
sleep at a distance from their master's apartment, and, being chiefly
Neapolitans, are readily made drunk.  I have keys, as you know, with
which I can open any chamber or cabinet in Paris.  For three months a
night has not passed, during the greater part of which I have not
been engaged, personally, in ransacking the D---- Hotel.  My honor is
interested, and, to mention a great secret, the reward is enormous.
So I did not abandon the search until I had become fully satisfied
that the thief is a more astute man than myself.  I fancy that I have
investigated every nook and corner of the premises in which it is
possible that the paper can be concealed."

"But is it not possible," I suggested, "that although the letter may
be in possession of the minister, as it unquestionably is, he may
have concealed it elsewhere than upon his own premises?"

"This is barely possible," said Dupin.  "The present peculiar
condition of affairs at court, and especially of those intrigues in
which D---- is known to be involved, would render the instant
availability of the document--its susceptibility of being produced at
a moment's notice--a point of nearly equal importance with its
possession."

"Its susceptibility of being produced?" said I.

"That is to say, of being _destroyed_," said Dupin.

"True," I observed; "the paper is clearly then upon the premises.  As
for its being upon the person of the minister, we may consider that
as out of the question."

"Entirely," said the Prefect.  "He has been twice waylaid, as if by
footpads, and his person rigidly searched under my own inspection."

"You might have spared yourself this trouble," said Dupin.  "D----, I
presume, is not altogether a fool, and, if not, must have anticipated
these waylayings, as a matter of course."

"Not _altogether_ a fool," said G----, "but then he is a poet, which
I take to be only one remove from a fool."

"_True_," said Dupin, after a long and thoughtful whiff from his
meerschaum, "although I have been guilty of certain doggerel myself."

"Suppose you detail," said I, "the particulars of your search."

"Why, the fact is, we took our time, and we searched _everywhere_.  I
have had long experience in these affairs.  I took the entire
building, room by room; devoting the nights of a whole week to each.
We examined, first, the furniture of each department.  We opened
every possible drawer; and I presume you know that, to a properly
trained police-agent, such a thing as a '_secret_' drawer is
impossible.  Any man is a dolt who permits a 'secret' drawer to
escape him in a search of this kind.  The thing is so plain.  There
is a certain amount of bulk--of space--to be accounted for in every
cabinet.  Then we have accurate rules.  The fiftieth part of a line
could not escape us.  After the cabinets we took the chairs.  The
cushions we probed with the fine long needles you have seen me
employ.  From the tables we removed the tops."

"Why so?"

"Sometimes the top of a table, or other similarly arranged piece of
furniture, is removed by the person wishing to conceal an article;
then the leg is excavated, the article deposited within the cavity,
and the top replaced.  The bottoms and tops of bedposts are employed
in the same way."

"But could not the cavity be detected by sounding?" I asked.

"By no means, if, when the article is deposited, a sufficient wadding
of cotton be placed around it.  Besides, in our case, we were obliged
to proceed without noise."

"But you could not have removed--you could not have taken to pieces
_all_ articles of furniture in which it would have been possible to
make a deposit in the manner you mention.  A letter may be compressed
into a thin spiral roll, not differing much in shape or bulk from a
large knitting-needle, and in this form it might be inserted into the
rung of a chair, for example.  You did not take to pieces all the
chairs?"

"Certainly not; but we did better--we examined the rungs of every
chair in the hotel, and, indeed, the jointings of every description
of furniture, by the aid of a most powerful microscope.  Had there
been any traces of recent disturbance we should not have failed to
detect it instantly.  A single grain of gimlet-dust, for example,
would have been as obvious as an apple.  Any disorder in the
gluing--any unusual gaping in the joints--would have sufficed to
ensure detection."

"I presume you looked to the mirrors, between the boards and the
plates, and you probed the beds and the bedclothes, as well as the
curtains and carpets."

"That of course; and when we had absolutely completed every particle
of the furniture in this way, then we examined the house itself.  We
divided its entire surface into compartments, which we numbered, so
that none might be missed; then we scrutinized each individual square
inch throughout the premises, including the two houses immediately
adjoining, with the microscope, as before."

"The two houses adjoining!" I exclaimed; "you must have had a great
deal of trouble."

"We had; but the reward offered is prodigious."

"You include the _ground_ about the houses?"

"All the grounds are paved with brick.  They gave us comparatively
little trouble.  We examined the moss between the bricks, and found
it undisturbed."

"You looked among D----'s papers, of course, and into the books of
the library?"

"Certainly; we opened every package and parcel; we not only opened
every book, but we turned over every leaf in each volume, not
contenting ourselves with a mere shake, according to the fashion of
some of our police officers.  We also measured the thickness of every
book-_cover_, with the most accurate admeasurement, and applied to
each the most jealous scrutiny of the microscope.  Had any of the
bindings been recently meddled with, it would have been utterly
impossible that the fact should have escaped observation.  Some five
or six volumes, just from the hands of the binder, we carefully
probed, longitudinally, with the needles."

"You explored the floors beneath the carpets?"

"Beyond doubt.  We removed every carpet, and examined the boards with
the microscope."

"And the paper on the walls?"

"Yes."

"You looked into the cellars?"

"We did."

"Then," I said, "you have been making a miscalculation, and the
letter is _not_ upon the premises, as you suppose."

"I fear you are right there," said the Prefect.  "And now, Dupin,
what would you advise me to do?"

"To make a thorough research of the premises."

"That is absolutely needless," replied G----.  "I am not more sure
that I breathe than I am that the letter is not at the hotel."

"I have no better advice to give you," said Dupin.  "You have, of
course, an accurate description of the letter?"

"Oh, yes!"--And here the Prefect, producing a memorandum-book,
proceeded to read aloud a minute account of the internal, and
especially of the external appearance of the missing document.  Soon
after finishing the perusal of this description, he took his
departure, more entirely depressed in spirits than I had ever known
the good gentleman before.

In about a month afterward he paid us another visit, and found us
occupied very nearly as before.  He took a pipe and a chair and
entered into some ordinary conversation.  At length I said:

"Well, but, G----, what of the purloined letter?  I presume you have
at last made up your mind that there is no such thing as overreaching
the minister?"

"Confound him, say I--yes; I made the reexamination, however, as
Dupin suggested--but it was all labor lost, as I knew it would be."

"How much was the reward offered, did you say?" asked Dupin.

"Why, a very great deal--a _very_ liberal reward--I don't like to say
how much, precisely; but one thing I _will_ say, that I wouldn't mind
giving my individual check for fifty thousand francs to any one who
could obtain me that letter.  The fact is, it is becoming of more and
more importance every day; and the reward has been lately doubled.
If it were trebled, however, I could do no more than I have done."

"Why, yes," said Dupin, drawlingly between the whiffs of his
meerschaum, "I really--think, G----, you have not exerted
yourself--to the utmost in this matter.  You might--do a little more,
I think, eh?"

"How?--in what way?"

"Why--puff, puff--you might--puff, puff--employ counsel in the
matter, eh?--puff, puff, puff.  Do you remember the story they tell
of Abernethy?"

"No; hang Abernethy!"

"To be sure! hang him and welcome.  But, once upon a time, a certain
rich miser conceived the design of sponging upon this Abernethy for a
medical opinion.  Getting up, for this purpose, an ordinary
conversation in a private company, he insinuated his case to the
physician, as that of an imaginary individual.

"'We will suppose,' said the miser, 'that his symptoms are such and
such; now, doctor, what would _you_ have directed him to take?'

"'Take!' said Abernethy, 'why, take _advice_ to be sure.'"

"But," said the Prefect, a little discomposed, "_I am perfectly
willing_ to take advice, and to pay for it.  I would _really_ give
fifty thousand francs to any one who would aid me in the matter."

"In that case," replied Dupin, opening a drawer, and producing a
check-book, "you may as well fill me up a check for the amount
mentioned.  When you have signed it, I will hand you the letter."

I was astounded.  The Prefect appeared absolutely thunder-stricken.
For some minutes he remained speechless and motionless, looking
incredulously at my friend, with open mouth and eyes that seemed
starting from their sockets; then apparently recovering himself in
some measure, he seized a pen, and after several pauses and vacant
stares, finally filled up and signed a check for fifty thousand
francs, and handed it across the table to Dupin.  The latter examined
it carefully and deposited it in his pocket-book; then, unlocking an
_escritoire_, took thence a letter and gave it to the Prefect.  This
functionary grasped it in a perfect agony of joy, opened it with a
trembling hand, cast a rapid glance at its contents, and then
scrambling and struggling to the door, rushed at length
unceremoniously from the room and from the house, without having
uttered a syllable since Dupin had requested him to fill up the check.

When he had gone, my friend entered into some explanations.

"The Parisian police," he said, "are exceedingly able in their way.
They are persevering, ingenious, cunning, and thoroughly versed in
the knowledge which their duties seem chiefly to demand.  Thus, when
G---- detailed to us his mode of searching the premises at the Hotel
D----, I felt entire confidence in his having made a satisfactory
investigation--so far as his labors extended."

"So far as his labors extended?" said I.

"Yes," said Dupin.  "The measures adopted were not only the best of
their kind, but carried out to absolute perfection.  Had the letter
been deposited within the range of their search, these fellows would,
beyond a question, have found it."

I merely laughed--but he seemed quite serious in all that he said.

"The measures, then," he continued, "were good in their kind, and
well executed; their defect lay in their being inapplicable to the
case and to the man.  A certain set of highly ingenious resources
are, with the Prefect, a sort of Procrustean bed, to which he
forcibly adapts his designs.  But he perpetually errs by being too
deep or too shallow for the matter in hand; and many a schoolboy is a
better reasoner than he.  I knew one about eight years of age, whose
success at guessing in the game of 'even and odd' attracted universal
admiration.  This game is simple, and is played with marbles.  One
player holds in his hand a number of these toys, and demands of
another whether that number is even or odd.  If the guess is right,
the guesser wins one; if wrong, he loses one.  The boy to whom I
allude won all the marbles of the school.  Of course he had some
principle of guessing; and this lay in mere observation and
admeasurement of the astuteness of his opponents.  For example, an
arrant simpleton is his opponent, and holding up his closed hand,
asks, 'Are they even or odd?'  Our schoolboy replies, 'Odd,' and
loses; but upon the second trial he wins, for he then says to
himself: 'The simpleton had them even upon the first trial, and his
amount of cunning is just sufficient to make him have them odd upon
the second; I will therefore guess odd';--he guesses odd, and wins.
Now, with a simpleton a degree above the first, he would have
reasoned thus: 'This fellow finds that in the first instance I
guessed odd, and, in the second, he will propose to himself, upon the
first impulse, a simple variation from even to odd, as did the first
simpleton; but then a second thought will suggest that this is too
simple a variation, and finally he will decide upon putting it even
as before.  I will therefore guess even';--he guesses even, and wins.
Now this mode of reasoning in the school-boy, whom his fellows termed
'lucky'--what, in its last analysis, is it?"

"It is merely," I said, "an identification of the reasoner's
intellect with that of his opponent."

"It is," said Dupin; "and, upon inquiring of the boy by what means he
effected the _thorough_ identification in which his success
consisted, I received answer as follows: 'When I wish to find out how
wise, or how stupid, or how good, or how wicked is any one, or what
are his thoughts at the moment, I fashion the expression of my face,
as accurately as possible, in accordance with the expression of his,
and then wait to see what thoughts or sentiments arise in my mind or
heart, as if to match or correspond with the expression.'  This
response of the schoolboy lies at the bottom of all the spurious
profundity which has been attributed to Rochefoucauld, to La Bougive,
to Machiavelli, and to Campanella."

"And the identification," I said, "of the reasoner's intellect with
that of his opponent depends, if I understand you aright, upon the
accuracy with which the opponent's intellect is admeasured."

"For its practical value it depends upon this," replied Dupin; "and
the Prefect and his cohort fail so frequently, first by default of
this identification, and, secondly, by ill-admeasurement, or rather
through non-admeasurement, of the intellect with which they are
engaged.  They consider only their _own_ ideas of ingenuity; and, in
searching for anything hidden advert only to the modes in which
_they_ would have hidden it.  They are right in this much that their
own ingenuity is a faithful representative of that of _the mass_; but
when the cunning of the individual felon is diverse in character from
their own, the felon foils them, of course.  This always happens when
it is above their own, and very usually when it is below.  They have
no variation of principle in their investigations; at best, when
urged by some unusual emergency--by some extraordinary reward--they
extend or exaggerate their old modes of _practise_, without touching
their principles.  What, for example, in this case of D----, has been
done to vary the principle of action?  What is all this boring, and
probing, and sounding, and scrutinizing with the microscope, and
dividing the surface of the building into registered square
inches--what is it all but an exaggeration _of the application_ of
the one principle or set of principles of search, which are based
upon the one set of notions regarding human ingenuity, to which the
Prefect, in the long routine of his duty, has been accustomed?  Do
you not see he has taken it for granted that _all_ men proceed to
conceal a letter, not exactly in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg,
but, at least, in _some_ out-of-the-way hole or corner suggested by
the same tenor of thought which would urge a man to secrete a letter
in a gimlet-hole bored in a chair-leg?  And do you not see also that
such _recherche_ nooks for concealment are adapted only for ordinary
occasions, and would be adopted only by ordinary intellects; for, in
all cases of concealment, a disposal of the article concealed--a
disposal of it in this _recherche_ manner--is in the very first
instance presumable and presumed; and thus its discovery depends, not
at all upon the acumen, but altogether upon the care, patience, and
determination of the seekers; and where the case is of
importance--or, what amounts to the same thing in the political eyes,
when the reward is of magnitude--the qualities in question have
_never_ been known to fail.  You will now understand what I meant in
suggesting that, had the purloined letter been hidden anywhere within
the limits of the Prefect's examination--in other words, had the
principle of its concealment been comprehended within the principles
of the Prefect--its discovery would have been a matter altogether
beyond question.  This functionary, however, has been thoroughly
mystified; and the remote source of his defeat lies in the
supposition that the minister is a fool, because he has acquired
renown as a poet.  All fools are poets; this the Prefect _feels_; and
he is merely guilty of a _non distributio medii_ in thence inferring
that all poets are fools."

"But is this really the poet?" I asked.  "There are two brothers, I
know; and both have attained reputation in letters.  The minister, I
believe, has written learnedly on the Differential Calculus.  He is a
mathematician, and no poet."

"You are mistaken; I know him well; he is both.  As poet and
mathematician, he would reason well; as mere mathematician, he could
not have reasoned at all, and thus would have been at the mercy of
the Prefect."

"You surprise me," I said, "by these opinions, which have been
contradicted by the voice of the world.  You do not mean to set at
naught the well-digested idea of centuries.  The mathematical reason
has long been regarded as the _reason par excellence_.

"'_Il y a a parier_,'" replied Dupin, quoting from Chamfort, "'_que
toute idee publique, toute convention recue, est une sottise, car
elle a convenue au plus grand nombre._'  The mathematicians, I grant
you, have done their best to promulgate the popular error to which
you allude, and which is none the less an error for its promulgation
as truth.  With an art worthy a better cause, for example, they have
insinuated the term 'analysis' into application to algebra.  The
French are the originators of this particular deception; but if a
term is of any importance--if words derive any value from
applicability--then 'analysis' conveys 'algebra' about as much as, in
Latin, '_ambitus_' implies 'ambition,' '_religio_' 'religion,' or
'_homines honesti_' a set of _honorable_ men."

"You have a quarrel on hand, I see," said I, "with some of the
algebraists of Paris; but proceed."

"I dispute the availability, and thus the value, of that reason which
is cultivated in any special form other than the abstractly logical.
I dispute, in particular, the reason educed by mathematical study.
The mathematics are the science of form and quantity; mathematical
reasoning is merely logic applied to observation upon form and
quantity.  The great error lies in supposing that even the truths of
what is called _pure_ algebra are abstract or general truths.  And
this error is so egregious that I am confounded at the universality
with which it has been received.  Mathematical axioms are _not_
axioms of general truth.  What is true of _relation_--of form and
quantity--is often grossly false in regard to morals, for example.
In this latter science it is very usually _un_true that the
aggregated parts are equal to the whole.  In chemistry also the axiom
fails.  In the consideration of motive it fails; for two motives,
each of a given value, have not, necessarily, a value when united,
equal to the sum of their values apart.  There are numerous other
mathematical truths which are only truths within the limits of
_relation_.  But the mathematician argues from his _finite truths_,
through habit, as if they were of an absolutely general
applicability--as the world indeed imagines them to be.

"Bryant, in his very learned 'Mythology,' mentions an analogous
source of error, when he says that 'although the pagan fables are not
believed, yet we forget ourselves continually, and make inferences
from them as existing realities.'  With the algebraists, however, who
are pagans themselves, the 'pagan fables' _are_ believed, and the
inferences are made, not so much through lapse of memory as through
an unaccountable addling of the brains.  In short, I never yet
encountered the mere mathematician who could be trusted out of equal
roots, or one who did not clandestinely hold it as a point of his
faith that _x^2+px_ was absolutely and unconditionally equal to _q_.
Say to one of these gentlemen, by way of experiment, if you please,
that you believe occasions may occur where _x^2+px_ is not altogether
equal to _q_, and, having made him understand what you mean, get out
of his reach as speedily as convenient, for, beyond doubt, he will
endeavor to knock you down.

"I mean to say," continued Dupin, while I merely laughed at his last
observations, "that if the minister had been no more than a
mathematician, the Prefect would have been under no necessity of
giving me this check.  I knew him, however, as both mathematician and
poet, and my measures were adapted to his capacity, with reference to
the circumstances by which he was surrounded.  I knew him as a
courtier, too, and as a bold _intriguant_.  Such a man, I considered,
could not fail to be aware of the ordinary political modes of action.
He could not have failed to anticipate--and events have proved that
he did not fail to anticipate--the waylayings to which he was
subjected.  He must have foreseen, I reflected, the secret
investigations of his premises.  His frequent absences from home at
night, which were hailed by the Prefect as certain aids to his
success, I regarded only as _ruses_, to afford opportunity for
thorough search to the police, and thus the sooner to impress them
with the conviction to which G----, in fact, did finally arrive--the
conviction that the letter was not upon the premises.  I felt, also,
that the whole train of thought, which I was at some pains in
detailing to you just now, concerning the invariable principle of
political action in searches for articles concealed--I felt that this
whole train of thought would necessarily pass through the mind of the
minister.  It would imperatively lead him to despise all the ordinary
_nooks_ of concealment.  _He_ could not, I reflected, be so weak as
not to see that the most intricate and remote recess of his hotel
would be as open as his commonest closets to the eyes, to the probes,
to the gimlets, and to the microscopes of the Prefect.  I saw, in
fine, that he would be driven, as a matter of course, to
_simplicity_, if not deliberately induced to it as a matter of
choice.  You will remember, perhaps, how desperately the Prefect
laughed when I suggested, upon our first interview, that it was just
possible this mystery troubled him so much on account of its being so
_very_ self-evident."

"Yes," said I, "I remember his merriment well.  I really thought he
would have fallen into convulsions."

"The material world," continued Dupin, "abounds with very strict
analogies to the immaterial; and thus some color of truth has been
given to the rhetorical dogma, that metaphor, or simile, may be made
to strengthen an argument as well as to embellish a description.  The
principle of the _vis inerti√¶_, for example, seems to be identical in
physics and metaphysics.  It is not more true in the former, that a
large body is with more difficulty set in motion than a smaller one,
and that its subsequent _momentum_ is commensurate with this
difficulty, than it is, in the latter, that intellects of the vaster
capacity, while more forcible, more constant, and more eventful in
their movements than those of inferior grade, are yet the less
readily moved, and more embarrassed, and full of hesitation in the
first few steps of their progress.  Again: have you ever noticed
which of the street signs, over the shop doors, are the most
attractive of attention?"

"I have never given the matter a thought," I said.

"There is a game of puzzles," he resumed, "which is played upon a
map.  One party playing requires another to find a given word--the
name of town, river, state, or empire--any word, in short, upon the
motley and perplexed surface of the chart.  A novice in the game
generally seeks to embarrass his opponents by giving them the most
minutely lettered names; but the adept selects such words as stretch,
in large characters, from one end of the chart to the other.  These,
like the over-largely lettered signs and placards of the street,
escape observation by dint of being excessively obvious; and here the
physical oversight is precisely analogous with the moral
inapprehension by which the intellect suffers to pass unnoticed those
considerations which are too obtrusively and too palpably
self-evident.  But this is a point, it appears, somewhat above or
beneath the understanding of the Prefect.  He never once thought it
probable, or possible, that the minister had deposited the letter
immediately beneath the nose of the whole world by way of best
preventing any portion of that world from perceiving it.

"But the more I reflected upon the daring, dashing, and
discriminating ingenuity of D----; upon the fact that the document
must always have been _at hand_, if he intended to use it to good
purpose; and upon the decisive evidence, obtained by the Prefect,
that it was not hidden within the limits of that dignitary's ordinary
search--the more satisfied I became that, to conceal this letter, the
minister had resorted to the comprehensive and sagacious expedient of
not attempting to conceal it at all.

"Full of these ideas, I prepared myself with a pair of green
spectacles, and called one fine morning, quite by accident, at the
Ministerial hotel.  I found D---- at home, yawning, lounging, and
dawdling, as usual, and pretending to be in the last extremity of
_ennui_.  He is, perhaps, the most really energetic human being now
alive--but that is only when nobody sees him.

"To be even with him, I complained of my weak eyes, and lamented the
necessity of the spectacles, under cover of which I cautiously and
thoroughly surveyed the whole apartment, while seemingly intent only
upon the conversation of my host.

"I paid especial attention to a large writing-table near which he
sat, and upon which lay confusedly, some miscellaneous letters and
other papers, with one or two musical instruments and a few books.
Here, however, after a long and very deliberate scrutiny, I saw
nothing to excite particular suspicion.

"At length my eyes, in going the circuit of the room, fell upon a
trumpery filigree card-rack of pasteboard, that hung dangling by a
dirty blue ribbon, from a little brass knob just beneath the middle
of the mantelpiece.  In this rack, which had three or four
compartments, were five or six visiting cards and a solitary letter.
This last was much soiled and crumpled.  It was torn nearly in two,
across the middle--as if a design, in the first instance, to tear it
entirely up as worthless, had been altered or stayed in the second.
It had a large black seal, bearing the D---- cipher _very_
conspicuously, and was addressed, in a diminutive female hand, to
D----, the minister, himself.  It was thrust carelessly, and even, as
it seemed, contemptuously, into one of the uppermost divisions of the
rack.

"No sooner had I glanced at this letter than I concluded it to be
that of which I was in search.  To be sure, it was, to all
appearance, radically different from the one of which the Prefect had
read us so minute a description.  Here the seal was large and black,
with the D---- cipher; there it was small and red, with the ducal
arms of the S---- family.  Here, the address, to the minister, was
diminutive and feminine; there the superscription, to a certain royal
personage, was markedly bold and decided; the size alone formed a
point of correspondence.  But, then, the _radicalness_ of these
differences, which was excessive; the dirt; the soiled and torn
condition of the paper, so inconsistent with the _true_ methodical
habits of D----, and so suggestive of a design to delude the beholder
into an idea of the worthlessness of the document--these things,
together with the hyper obtrusive situation of this document, full in
the view of every visitor, and thus exactly in accordance with the
conclusions to which I had previously arrived; these things, I say,
were strongly corroborative of suspicion, in one who came with the
intention to suspect.

"I protracted my visit as long as possible, and while I maintained a
most animated discussion with the minister, upon a topic which I knew
well had never failed to interest and excite him, I kept my attention
really riveted upon the letter.  In this examination, I committed to
memory its external appearance and arrangement in the rack; and also
fell at length, upon a discovery which set at rest whatever trivial
doubt I might have entertained.  In scrutinizing the edges of the
paper, I observed them to be more _chafed_ than seemed necessary.
They presented the _broken_ appearance which is manifested when a
stiff paper, having been once folded and pressed with a folder, is
refolded in a reversed direction, in the same creases or edges which
had formed the original fold.  This discovery was sufficient.  It was
clear to me that the letter had been turned as a glove, inside out,
redirected and resealed.  I bade the minister good-morning, and took
my departure at once, leaving a gold snuff-box upon the table.

"The next morning I called for the snuff-box, when we resumed, quite
eagerly, the conversation of the preceding day.  While thus engaged,
however, a loud report, as if of a pistol, was heard immediately
beneath the windows of the hotel, and was succeeded by a series of
fearful screams, and the shoutings of a terrified mob.  D---- rushed
to a casement, threw it open, and looked out.  In the meantime I
stepped to the card-rack, took the letter, put it in my pocket, and
replaced it by a _facsimile_ (so far as regards externals) which I
had carefully prepared at my lodgings--imitating the D---- cipher,
very readily, by means of a seal formed of bread.

"The disturbance in the street had been occasioned by the frantic
behavior of a man with a musket.  He had fired it among a crowd of
women and children.  It proved, however, to have been without ball,
and the fellow was suffered to go his way as a lunatic or a drunkard.
When he had gone, D---- came from the window, whither I had followed
him immediately upon securing the object in view.  Soon afterward I
bade him farewell.  The pretended lunatic was a man in my own pay."

"But what purpose had you," I asked, "in replacing the letter by a
_facsimile_.  Would it not have been better, at the first visit, to
have seized it openly, and departed?"

"D----," replied Dupin, "is a desperate man, and a man of nerve.  His
hotel, too, is not without attendants devoted to his interests.  Had
I made the wild attempt you suggest, I might never have left the
Ministerial presence alive.  The good people of Paris might have
heard of me no more.  But I had an object apart from these
considerations.  You know my political prepossessions.  In this
matter, I act as a partizan of the lady concerned.  For eighteen
months the minister has had her in his power.  She has now him in
hers--since, being unaware that the letter is not in his possession,
he will proceed with his exactions as if it were.  Thus will he
commit himself, at once, to his political destruction.  His downfall,
too, will not be more precipitate than awkward.  It is all very well
to talk about the _facilis descensus Averni_; but in all kinds of
climbing, as Catalani said of singing, it is far more easy to get up
than to come down.  In the present instance I have no sympathy--at
least no pity--for him who descends.  He is that _monstram
horrendum_, an unprincipled man of genius.  I confess, however, that
I should like very well to know the precise character of his
thoughts, when, being defied by her whom the Prefect terms 'a certain
personage,' he is reduced to opening the letter which I left for him
in the card-rack."

"How? did you put anything particular in it?"

"Why--it did not seem altogether right to leave the interior
blank--that would have been insulting.  D----, at Vienna once, did me
an evil turn, which I told him, quite good-humoredly, that I should
remember.  So, as I knew he would feel some curiosity in regard to
the identity of the person who had outwitted him, I thought it a pity
not to give him a clue.  He is well acquainted with my MS., and I
just copied into the middle of the blank sheet the words:

  "'---- ---- ---- ---- ---- Un dessein si funeste,
  S' il n' est digne d' Atree, est digne de Thyeste.'

They are to be found in Cr√©billon's 'Atr√©e.'"




THE SIGN OF THE FOUR

BY SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

_Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is undoubtedly the most popular living writer
of detective fiction.  Sherlock Holmes is said to have been suggested
to the author by a study of the character and talents of Joseph Bell,
M.D., F.R.C.S., a professor, while Dr. Doyle was a student at
Edinburgh University.  He was particularly strong on what the author
calls "the science of deduction."  He used to tell the students their
symptoms, and would even give them details of their past life.  No
collection of famous detective stories would be complete that omitted
"The Sign of the Four."_




THE SIGN OF THE FOUR

By SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE



CHAPTER I

_The Science of Deduction_

Sherlock Holmes took his bottle from the corner of the mantelpiece
and his hypodermic syringe from its neat morocco case.  With his
long, white, nervous fingers he adjusted the delicate needle, and
rolled back his left shirt-cuff.  For some little time his eyes
rested thoughtfully upon the sinewy forearm and wrist, all dotted and
scarred with innumerable puncture-marks.  Finally he thrust the sharp
point home, pressed down the tiny piston, and sunk back into the
velvet-lined armchair with a long sigh of satisfaction.

Three times a day for many months I had witnessed this performance,
but custom had not reconciled my mind to it.  On the contrary, from
day to day I had become more irritable at the sight, and my
conscience swelled nightly within me at the thought that I had lacked
the courage to protest.  Again and again I had registered a vow that
I should deliver my soul upon the subject, but there was that in the
cool, nonchalant air of my companion which made him the last man with
whom one would care to take anything approaching to a liberty.  His
great powers, his masterly manner, and the experience which I had had
of his many extraordinary qualities, all made me diffident and
backward in crossing him.

Yet upon that afternoon, whether it was the claret which I had taken
with my lunch, or the additional exasperation produced by the extreme
deliberation of his manner, I suddenly felt that I could hold out no
longer.

"Which is it to-day?" I asked.  "Morphine or cocaine?"

He raised his eyes languidly from the old black-letter volume which
he had opened.  "It is cocaine," he said; "a seven per cent solution.
Would you care to try it?"

"No, indeed," I answered, bruskly.  "My constitution has not got over
the Afghan campaign yet.  I can not afford to throw any extra strain
upon it."

He smiled at my vehemence.  "Perhaps you are right, Watson," he said.
"I suppose that its influence is physically a bad one.  I find it,
however, so transcendently stimulating and clarifying to the mind
that its secondary action is a matter of small moment."

"But consider!" I said, earnestly.  "Count the cost!  Your brain may,
as you say, be roused and excited, but it is a pathological and
morbid process, which involves increased tissue-change, and may at
last leave a permanent weakness.  You know, too, what a black
reaction comes upon you.  Surely the game is hardly worth the candle.
Why should you, for a mere passing pleasure, risk the loss of those
great powers with which you have been endowed?  Remember that I speak
not only as one comrade to another, but as a medical man to one for
whose constitution he is to some extent answerable."

He did not seem offended.  On the contrary, he put his finger-tips
together and leaned his elbows on the arms of his chair, like one who
has a relish for conversation.

"My mind," he said, "rebels at stagnation.  Give me problems, give me
work, give me the most abstruse cryptogram, or the most intricate
analysis, and I am in my own proper atmosphere, I can dispense then
with artificial stimulants.  But I abhor the dull routine of
existence.  I crave for mental exaltation.  That is why I have chosen
my own particular profession--or rather created it, for I am the only
one in the world."

"The only unofficial detective?" I said, raising my eyebrows.

"The only unofficial consulting detective," he answered.  "I am the
last and highest court of appeal in detection.  When Gregson, or
Lestrade, or Athelney Jones are out of their depths--which, by the
way, is their normal state--the matter is laid before me.  I examine
the data, as an expert, and pronounce a specialist's opinion.  I
claim no credit in such cases.  My name figures in no newspaper.  The
work itself, the pleasure of finding a field for my peculiar powers,
is my highest reward.  But you have yourself had some experience of
my methods of work in the Jefferson Hope case."

"Yes, indeed," said I, cordially.  "I was never so struck by anything
in my life.  I even embodied it in a small brochure with the somewhat
fantastic title of 'A Study in Scarlet.'"

He shook his head sadly.  "I glanced over it," said he.  "Honestly, I
can not congratulate you upon it.  Detection is, or ought to be, an
exact science, and should be treated in the same cold and unemotional
manner.  You have attempted to tinge it with romanticism, which
produces much the same effect as if you worked a love story or an
elopement into the fifth proposition of Euclid."

"But the romance was there," I remonstrated.  "I could not tamper
with the facts."

"Some facts should be suppressed, or at least a just sense of
proportion should be observed in treating them.  The only point in
the case which deserved mention was the curious analytical reasoning
from effects to causes by which I succeeded in unraveling it."

I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially
designed to please him.  I confess, too, that I was irritated by the
egotism which seemed to demand that every line of my pamphlet should
be devoted to his own special doings.  More than once during the
years that I had lived with him in Baker Street I had observed that a
small vanity underlay my companion's quiet and didactic manner.  I
made no remark, however, but sat nursing my wounded leg.  I had had a
Jezail bullet through it some time before, and though it did not
prevent me from walking, it ached wearily at every change of the
weather.

"My practise has extended recently to the Continent," said Holmes,
after a while, filling up his old brier-root pipe.  "I was consulted
last week by Fran√ßois le Villard, who, as you probably know, has come
rather to the front lately in the French detective service.  He has
all the Celtic power of quick intuition, but he is deficient in the
wide range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher
developments of his art.  The case was concerned with a will, and
possessed some features of interest.  I was able to refer him to two
parallel cases; the one at Riga in 1857, and the other at St. Louis
in 1871, which have suggested to him the true solution.  Here is the
letter which I had this morning acknowledging my assistance."  He
tossed over, as he spoke, a crumpled sheet of foreign note-paper.  I
glanced my eyes down it, catching a profusion of notes of admiration,
with stray "magnifiques," "coup-de-ma√Ætres," and "tours-de-force,"
all testifying to the ardent admiration of the Frenchman.

"He speaks as a pupil to his master," said I.

"Oh, he rates my assistance too highly," said Sherlock Holmes,
lightly.  "He has considerable gifts himself.  He possesses two out
of the three qualities necessary for the ideal detective.  He has the
power of observation and that of deduction.  He is only wanting in
knowledge; and that may come in time.  He is now translating my small
works into French."

"Your works?"

"Oh, didn't you know?" he cried, laughing.  "Yes, I have been guilty
of several monographs.  They are all upon technical subjects.  Here,
for example, is one 'Upon the Distinction Between the Ashes of the
Various Tobaccos.'  In it I enumerate a hundred and forty forms of
cigar, cigarette, and pipe tobacco, with colored plates illustrating
the difference in the ash.  It is a point which is continually
turning up in criminal trials, and which is sometimes of supreme
importance as a clue.  If you can say definitely, for example, that
some murder has been done by a man who was smoking an Indian lunkah,
it obviously narrows your field of search.  To the trained eye there
is as much difference between the black ash of a Trichinopoly and the
white fluff of bird's-eye as there is between a cabbage and a potato."

"You have an extraordinary genius for minuti√¶," I remarked.

"I appreciate their importance.  Here is my monograph upon the
tracing of footsteps, with some remarks upon the uses of plaster of
Paris as a preserver of impresses.  Here, too, is a curious little
work upon the influence of a trade upon the form of the hand, with
lithotypes of the hands of slaters, sailors, cork-cutters,
compositors, weavers, and diamond-polishers.  That is a matter of
great practical interest to the scientific detective--especially in
cases of unclaimed bodies, or in discovering the antecedents of
criminals.  But I weary you with my hobby."

"Not at all," I answered, earnestly.  "It is of the greatest interest
to me, especially since I have had the opportunity of observing your
practical application of it.  But you spoke just now of observation
and deduction.  Surely the one to some extent implies the other."

"Why, hardly," he answered, leaning back luxuriously in his armchair,
and sending up thick blue wreaths from his pipe.  "For example,
observation shows me that you have been to the Wigmore Street
Post-Office this morning, but deduction lets me know that when there
you despatched a telegram."

"Right!" said I.  "Right on both points!  But I confess that I don't
see how you arrived at it.  It was a sudden impulse upon my part, and
I have mentioned it to no one."

"It is simplicity itself," he remarked, chuckling at my surprise; "so
absurdly simple that an explanation is superfluous; and yet it may
serve to define the limits of observation and of deduction.
Observation tells me that you have a little reddish mold adhering to
your instep.  Just opposite the Wigmore Street Office they have taken
up the pavement and thrown up some earth which lies in such a way
that it is difficult to avoid treading in it in entering.  The earth
is of this peculiar reddish tint which is found, so far as I know,
nowhere else in the neighborhood.  So much is observation.  The rest
is deduction."

"How, then, did you deduce the telegram?"

"Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat
opposite to you all the morning.  I see also in your open desk there
that you have a sheet of stamps and a thick bundle of post-cards.
What could you go into the postoffice for, then, but to send a wire?
Eliminate all other factors, and the one which remains must be the
truth."

"In this case it certainly is so," I replied, after a little thought.
"The thing, however, is, as you say, of the simplest.  Would you
think me impertinent if I were to put your theories to a more severe
test?"

"On the contrary," he answered, "it would prevent me from taking a
second dose of cocaine.  I should be delighted to look into any
problem which you might submit to me."

"I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any
object in daily use without leaving the impress of his individuality
upon it in such a way that a trained observer might read it.  Now, I
have here a watch which has recently come into my possession.  Would
you have the kindness to let me have an opinion upon the character or
habits of the late owner?"

I handed him the watch with some slight feeling of amusement in my
heart, for the test was, as I thought, an impossible one, and I
intended it as a lesson against the somewhat dogmatic tone which he
occasionally assumed.  He balanced the watch in his hand, gazed hard
at the dial, opened the back, and examined the works, first with his
naked eyes and then with a powerful convex lens.  I could hardly keep
from smiling at his crestfallen face, when he finally snapped the
case to and handed it back.

"There are hardly any data," he remarked.  "The watch has been
recently cleaned, which robs me of my most suggestive facts."

"You are right," I answered.  "It was cleaned before being sent to
me."  In my heart I accused my companion of putting forward a most
lame and impotent excuse to cover his failure.  What data could he
expect from an uncleaned watch?

"Though unsatisfactory, my research has not been entirely barren," he
observed, staring up at the ceiling with dreamy, lack-lustre eyes.
"Subject to your correction, I should judge that the watch belonged
to your elder brother, who inherited it from your father."

"That you gather, no doubt, from the H. W. upon the back?"

"Quite so.  The W. suggests your own name.  The date of the watch is
nearly fifty years back, and the initials are as old as the watch; so
it was made for the last generation.  Jewelry usually descends to the
eldest son, and he is most likely to have the same name as his
father.  Your father has, if I remember right, been dead many years.
It has, therefore, been in the hands of your eldest brother."

"Right, so far," said I.  "Anything else?"

"He was a man of untidy habits--very untidy and careless.  He was
left with good prospects, but he threw away his chances, lived for
some time in poverty, with occasional short intervals of prosperity,
and finally, taking to drink, he died.  That is all I can gather."

I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with
considerable bitterness in my heart.

"This is unworthy of you, Holmes," I said.  "I could not have
believed that you would have descended to this.  You have made
inquiries into the history of my unhappy brother, and you now pretend
to deduce this knowledge in some fanciful way.  You can not expect me
to believe that you have read all this from his old watch!  It is
unkind, and, to speak plainly, has a touch of charlatanism in it."

"My dear doctor," said he kindly, "pray accept my apologies.  Viewing
the matter as an abstract problem, I had forgotten how personal and
painful a thing it might be to you.  I assure you, however, that I
never even knew that you had a brother until you handed me the watch."

"Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get all these
facts?  They are absolutely correct in every particular."

"Ah, that is good luck.  I could only say what was the balance of
probability.  I did not at all expect to be so accurate."

"But it was not mere guesswork?"

"No, no; I never guess.  It is a shocking habit--destructive to the
logical faculty.  What seems strange to you is only so because you do
not follow my train of thought or observe the small facts upon which
large inferences may depend.  For example, I began by stating that
your brother was careless.  When you observe the lower part of that
watch-case you notice that it is not only dented in two places, but
it is cut and marked all over from the habit of keeping other hard
objects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket.  Surely it is no
great feat to assume that a man who treats a fifty-guinea watch so
cavalierly must be a careless man.  Neither is it a very far-fetched
inference that a man who inherits one article of such value is pretty
well provided for in other respects."

I nodded to show that I followed his reasoning.

"It is very customary for pawnbrokers in England, when they take a
watch, to scratch the number of the ticket with a pin-point upon the
inside of the case.  It is more handy than a label, as there is no
risk of the number being lost or transposed.  There are no less than
four such numbers visible to my lens on the inside of this case.
Inference--that your brother was often at low water.  Secondary
inference--that he had occasional bursts of prosperity, or he could
not have redeemed the pledge.  Finally, I ask you to look at the
inner plate which contains the keyhole.  Look at the thousands of
scratches all around the hole--marks where the key has slipped.  What
sober man's key could have scored those grooves?  But you will never
see a drunkard's watch without them.  He winds it at night, and he
leaves these traces of his unsteady hand.  Where is the mystery in
all this?"

"It is as clear as daylight," I answered.  "I regret the injustice
which I did you.  I should have had more faith in your marvelous
faculty.  May I ask whether you have any professional inquiry on foot
at present?"

"None.  Hence the cocaine.  I can not live without brain-work.  What
else is there to live for?  Stand at the window here.  Was ever such
a dreary, dismal, unprofitable world?  See how the yellow fog swirls
down the street and drifts across dun-colored houses.  What could be
more hopelessly prosaic and material?  What is the use of having
powers, doctor, when one has no field upon which to exert them?
Crime is commonplace, and existence is commonplace, and no qualities
save those which are commonplace have any function upon earth."

I had opened my mouth to reply to his tirade, when, with a crisp
knock, our landlady entered, bearing a card upon a brass salver.

"A young lady for you, sir," she said, addressing my companion.

"Miss Mary Morstan," he read.  "Hum!  I have no recollection of that
name.  Ask the young lady to step up, Mrs. Hudson.  Don't go, doctor.
I prefer that you remain."



CHAPTER II

_The Statement of the Case_

Miss Morstan entered the room with a firm step and an outward
composure of manner.  She was a blond young lady, small, dainty, well
gloved, and dressed in the most perfect taste.  There was, however, a
plainness and simplicity about her costume which bore with a
suggestion of limited means.  The dress was a sombre grayish beige,
untrimmed and unbraided, and she wore a small turban of the same dull
hue, relieved only by a suspicion of white feather in the side.  Her
face had neither regularity of feature nor beauty of complexion, but
her expression was sweet and amiable, and her large blue eyes were
singularly spiritual and sympathetic.  In an experience of women
which extends over many nations and three separate continents I have
never looked upon a face which gave a clearer promise of a refined
and sensitive nature.  I could not but observe that, as she took the
seat which Sherlock Holmes placed for her, her lip trembled, her hand
quivered, and she showed every sign of intense inward agitation.

"I have come to you, Mr. Holmes," she said, "because you once enabled
my employer, Mrs. Cecil Forrester, to unravel a little domestic
complication.  She was much impressed by your kindness and skill."

"Mrs. Cecil Forrester," he repeated, thoughtfully.  "I believe that I
was of some slight service to her.  The case, however, as I remember
it, was a very simple one."

"She did not think so.  But, at least, you can not say the same of
mine.  I can hardly imagine anything more strange, more utterly
inexplicable, than the situation in which I find myself."

Holmes rubbed his hands and his eyes glistened.  He leaned forward in
his chair with an expression of extraordinary concentration upon his
clear-cut, hawk-like features.  "State your case," said he, in brisk
business tones.

I felt that my position was an embarrassing one.  "You will, I am
sure, excuse me," I said, rising from my chair.

To my surprise, the young lady held up her gloved hand to detain me.
"If your friend," she said, "would be good enough to stay, he might
be of inestimable service to me."

I relapsed into my chair.

"Briefly," she continued, "the facts are these.  My father was an
officer in an Indian regiment, who sent me home when I was quite a
child.  My mother was dead, and I had no relative in England.  I was
placed, however, in a comfortable boarding establishment at
Edinburgh, and there I remained until I was seventeen years of age.
In the year 1878 my father, who was senior captain of his regiment,
obtained twelve months' leave and came home.  He telegraphed to me
from London that he had arrived all safe, and directed me to come
down at once, giving the Langham Hotel as his address.  His message,
as I remember, was full of kindness and love.  On reaching London I
drove to the Langham, and was informed that Captain Morstan was
staying there, but that he had gone out the night before and had not
returned.  I waited all day without news of him.  That night, on the
advice of the manager of the hotel, I communicated with the police,
and next morning we advertised in all the papers.  Our inquiries led
to no result; and from that day to this no word has ever been heard
of my unfortunate father.  He came home, with his heart full of hope,
to find some peace, some comfort, and instead--"  She put her hand to
her throat, and a choking sob cut short the sentence.

"The date?" asked Holmes, opening his note-book.

"He disappeared upon the 3d of December, 1878--nearly ten years ago."

"His luggage?"

"Remained at the hotel.  There was nothing in it to suggest a
clue--some clothes, some books, and a considerable number of
curiosities from the Andaman Islands.  He had been one of the
officers in charge of the convict guard there."

"Had he any friends in town?"

"Only one that we know of--Major Sholto, of his own regiment, the
Thirty-fourth Bombay Infantry.  The major had retired some little
time before, and lived at Upper Norwood.  We communicated with him,
of course, but he did not even know that his brother officer was in
England."

"A singular case," remarked Holmes.

"I have not yet described to you the most singular part.  About six
years ago--to be exact, upon the 4th of May, 1882--an advertisement
appeared in the 'Times' asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan,
and stating that it would be to her advantage to come forward.  There
was no name or address appended.  I had at that time just entered the
family of Mrs. Cecil Forrester in the capacity of governess.  By her
advice I published my address in the advertisement column.  The same
day there arrived through the post a small card-box addressed to me,
which I found to contain a very large and lustrous pearl.  No word of
writing was enclosed.  Since then, every year upon the same date,
there has always appeared a similar box, containing a similar pearl,
without any clue as to the sender.  They have been pronounced by an
expert to be of a rare variety and of considerable value.  You can
see for yourselves that they are very handsome."  She opened a flat
box as she spoke, and showed me six of the finest pearls that I had
ever seen.

"Your statement is most interesting," said Sherlock Holmes.  "Has
anything else occurred to you?"

"Yes; and no later than to-day.  That is why I have come to you.
This morning I received this letter, which you will perhaps read for
yourself."

"Thank you," said Holmes.  "The envelope, too, please.  Postmark,
London, S.W., date, July 7.  Hum!  Man's thumb-mark on
corner--probably postman.  Best quality paper.  Envelopes at sixpence
a packet.  Particular man in his stationery.  No address.  'Be at the
third pillar from the left outside the Lyceum Theatre to-night at
seven o'clock.  If you are distrustful, bring two friends.  You are a
wronged woman, and shall have justice.  Do not bring police.  If you
do, all will be in vain.  Your unknown friend.'  Well, really, this
is a very pretty little mystery.  What do you intend to do, Miss
Morstan?"

"That is exactly what I want to ask you."

"Then we shall most certainly go.  You and I and--yes, why, Doctor
Watson is the very man.  Your correspondent says two friends.  He and
I have worked together before."

"But would he come?" she asked, with something appealing in her voice
and expression.

"I should be proud and happy," said I, fervently, "if I can be of any
service."

"You are both very kind," she answered.  "I have led a retired life,
and have no friends whom I could appeal to.  If I am here at six it
will do, I suppose?"

"You must not be later," said Holmes.  "There is one other point,
however.  Is this handwriting the same as that upon the pearl-box
addresses?"

"I have them here," she answered, producing half a dozen pieces of
paper.

"You are certainly a model client.  You have the correct intuition.
Let us see, now."  He spread out the papers upon the table and gave
little darting glances from one to the other.  "They are disguised
hands, except the letter," he said, presently, "but there can be no
question as to the authorship.  See how the irrepressible Greek
Œµ will break out, and see the twirl of the final _s_.  They
are undoubtedly by the same person.  I should not like to suggest
false hopes, Miss Morstan, but is there any resemblance between this
hand and that of your father?"

"Nothing could be more unlike."

"I expected to hear you say so.  We shall look out for you, then, at
six.  Pray allow me to keep the papers.  I may look into the matter
before then.  It is only half-past three.  Au revoir, then."

"Au revoir," said our visitor, and, with a bright, kindly glance from
one to the other of us, she replaced her pearl-box in her bosom and
hurried away.  Standing at the window, I watched her walking briskly
down the street, until the gray turban and white feather were but a
speck in the sombre crowd.

"What a very attractive woman!" I exclaimed, turning to my companion.

He had lighted his pipe again, and was leaning back with drooping
eyelids.  "Is she?" he said, languidly.  "I did not observe."

"You really are an automaton--a calculating-machine!" I cried.
"There is something positively inhuman in you at times."

He smiled gently.  "It is of the first importance," he said, "not to
allow your judgment to be biased by personal qualities.  A client is
to me a mere unit--a factor in a problem.  The emotional qualities
are antagonistic to clear reasoning.  I assure you that the most
winning woman I ever knew was hanged for poisoning three little
children for their insurance money, and the most repellent man of my
acquaintance is a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a
million upon the London poor."

"In this case, however--"

"I never make exceptions.  An exception disproves the rule.  Have you
ever had occasion to study character in handwriting?  What do you
make of this fellow's scribble?"

"It is legible and regular," I answered.  "A man of business habits
and some force of character."

Holmes shook his head.  "Look at his long letters," he said.  "They
hardly rise above the common herd.  That _d_ might be an _a_ and that
_l_ an _e_.  Men of character always differentiate their long
letters, however illegibly they may write.  There is vacillation in
his _k's_ and self-esteem in his capitals.  I am going out now.  I
have some few references to make.  Let me recommend this book--one of
the most remarkable ever penned.  It is Winwood Reade's 'Martyrdom of
Man.'  I shall be back in an hour."  I sat in the window with the
volume in my hand, but my thoughts were far from the daring
speculations of the writer.  My mind ran upon our late visitor--her
smiles, the deep rich tones of her voice, the strange mystery which
overhung her life.  If she were seventeen at the time of her father's
disappearance she must be seven-and-twenty now--a sweet age, when
youth has lost its self-consciousness and become a little sobered by
experience.  So I sat and mused, until such dangerous thoughts came
into my head that I hurried away to my desk and plunged furiously
into the latest treatise upon pathology.  What was I, an army surgeon
with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account, that I should dare to
think of such things?  She was a unit, a factor--nothing more.  If my
future were black, it was better surely to face it like a man than to
attempt to brighten it by mere will-o'-the-wisps of the imagination.



CHAPTER III

_In Quest of a Solution_

It was half-past five before Holmes returned.  He was bright, eager,
and in excellent spirits--a mood which in his case alternated with
fits of the blackest depression.

"There is no great mystery in this matter," he said, taking the cup
of tea which I had poured out for him.  "The facts appear to admit of
only one explanation."

"What! you have solved it already?"

"Well, that will be too much to say.  I have discovered a suggestive
fact, that is all.  It is, however, _very_ suggestive.  The details
are still to be added.  I have just found, on consulting the back
files of the 'Times,' that Major Sholto of Upper Norwood, late of the
Thirty-fourth Bombay Infantry, died upon the 28th of April, 1882."

"I may be very obtuse, Holmes, but I fail to see what this suggests."

"No?  You surprise me.  Look at it in this way, then.  Captain
Morstan disappears.  The only person in London whom he could have
visited is Major Sholto.  Major Sholto denies having heard that he
was in London.  Four years later Sholto dies.  _Within a week of his
death_, Captain Morstan's daughter receives a valuable present, which
is repeated from year to year, and now culminates in a letter which
describes her as a wronged woman.  What wrong can it refer to except
this deprivation of her father?  And why should the presents begin
immediately after Sholto's death, unless it is that Sholto's heir
knows something of the mystery, and desires to make compensation?
Have you any alternative theory which will meet the facts?"

"But what a strange compensation!  And how strangely made!  Why, too,
should he write a letter now, rather than six years ago?  Again, the
letter speaks of giving her justice.  What justice can she have?  It
is too much to suppose that her father is still alive.  There is no
other injustice in her case that you know of."

"There are difficulties; there are certainly difficulties," said
Sherlock Holmes, pensively.  "But our expedition of to-night will
solve them all.  Ah, here is a four-wheeler, and Miss Morstan is
inside.  Are you all ready?  Then we had better go down, for it is a
little past the hour."

I picked up my hat and my heaviest stick, but I observed that Holmes
took his revolver from his drawer and slipped it into his pocket.  It
was clear that he thought our night's work might be a serious one.

Miss Morstan was muffled in a dark cloak, and her sensitive face was
composed, but pale.  She must have been more than woman if she did
not feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were
embarking, yet her self-control was perfect, and she readily answered
the few additional questions which Sherlock Holmes put to her.

"Major Sholto was a very particular friend of papa's," she said.
"His letters were full of allusions to the major.  He and papa were
in command of the troops at the Andaman Islands, so they were thrown
a great deal together.  By the way, a curious paper was found in
papa's desk which no one can understand.  I don't suppose that it is
of the slightest importance, but I thought you might care to see it,
so I brought it with me.  It is here."

Holmes unfolded the paper carefully and smoothed it out upon his
knee.  He then very methodically examined it all over with his double
lens.

"It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked.  "It has at
some time been pinned to a board.  The diagram upon it appears to be
a plan of part of a large building, with numerous halls, corridors,
and passages.  At one point is a small cross done in red ink, and
above it is '3.37 from left,' in faded pencil-writing.  In the
left-hand corner is a curious hieroglyphic, like four crosses in a
line with their arms touching.  Beside it is written, in very rough
and coarse characters, 'The sign of the four--Jonathan Small, Mahomet
Singh, Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar.'  No, I confess that I do not see
how this bears upon the matter!  Yet it is evidently a document of
importance.  It has been kept carefully in a pocket-book; for the one
side is as clean as the other."

"It was in his pocket-book that we found it."

"Preserve it carefully, then, Miss Morstan, for it may prove to be of
use to us.  I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be
much deeper and more subtle than I at first supposed.  I must
reconsider my ideas."  He leaned back in the cab, and I could see by
his drawn brow and his vacant eye that he was thinking intently.
Miss Morstan and I chatted in an undertone about our present
expedition and its possible outcome, but our companion maintained his
impenetrable reserve until the end of our journey.

It was a September evening, and not yet seven o'clock, but the day
had been a dreary one, and a dense, drizzling fog lay low upon the
great city.  Mud-colored clouds drooped sadly over the muddy streets.
Down the Strand the lamps were but misty splotches of diffused light
which threw a feeble circular glimmer upon the slimy pavement.  The
yellow glare from the shop-windows streamed out into the steamy,
vaporous air, and threw a murky, shifting radiance across the crowded
thoroughfare.  There was to my mind something eery and ghost-like in
the endless procession of faces which flitted across these narrow
bars of light--sad faces and glad, haggard and merry.  Like all human
kind, they flitted from the gloom into the light, and so back into
the gloom once more.  I am not subject to impressions, but the dull,
heavy evening, with the strange business upon which we were engaged,
combined to make me nervous and depressed.  I could see from Miss
Morstan's manner that she was suffering from the same feeling.
Holmes alone could rise superior to petty influences.  He held his
open note-book upon his knee, and from time to time he jotted down
figures and memoranda in the light of his pocket-lantern.

At the Lyceum Theatre the crowds were already thick at the
side-entrances.  In front a continuous stream of hansoms and
four-wheelers were rattling up, discharging their cargoes of
shirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women.  We had hardly
reached the third pillar, which was our rendezvous, before a small,
dark, brisk man, in the dress of a coachman, accosted us.

"Are you the parties who come with Miss Morstan?" he asked.

"I am Miss Morstan, and these two gentlemen are my friends," said she.

He bent a pair of wonderfully penetrating and questioning eyes upon
us.  "You will excuse me, miss," he said, with a certain dogged
manner, "but I was to ask you to give me your word that neither of
your companions is a police officer."

"I give you my word on that," she answered.

He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a
four-wheeler, and opened the door.  The man who had addressed us
mounted to the box, while we took our places inside.  We had hardly
done so before the driver whipped up his horse, and we plunged away
at a furious pace through the foggy streets.

The situation was a curious one.  We were driving to an unknown
place, on an unknown errand.  Yet our invitation was either a
complete hoax, which was an inconceivable hypothesis, or else we had
good reason to think that important issues might hang upon our
journey.  Miss Morstan's demeanor was as resolute and collected as
ever.  I endeavored to cheer and amuse her by reminiscences of my
adventures in Afghanistan; but to tell the truth, I was myself so
excited at our situation and so curious as to our destination that my
stories were slightly involved.  To this day she declares that I told
her one moving anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the
dead of night, and how I fired a double-barreled tiger cub at it.  At
first I had some idea as to the direction in which we were driving;
but soon, what with our pace, the fog, and my own limited knowledge
of London, I lost my bearings, and knew nothing, save that we seemed
to be going a very long way.  Sherlock Holmes was never at fault,
however, and he muttered the names as the cab rattled through squares
and in and out by tortuous by-streets.

"Rochester Row," said he.  "Now Vincent Square.  Now we come out on
the Vauxhall Bridge Road.  We are making for the Surrey side
apparently.  Yes, I thought so.  Now we are on the bridge.  You can
catch glimpses of the river."

We did indeed get a fleeting view of a stretch of the Thames, with
the lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed
on, and was soon involved in a labyrinth of streets upon the other
side.

"Wordsworth Road," said my companion.  "Priory Road.  Lark Hall Lane.
Stockwell Place.  Robert Street.  Cold Harbor Lane.  Our quest does
not appear to take us to very fashionable regions."

We had, indeed, reached a questionable and forbidding neighborhood.
Long lines of dull brick houses were only relieved by the coarse
glare and tawdry brilliancy of public-houses at the corner.  Then
came rows of two-storied villas, each with a fronting of miniature
garden, and then again interminable lines of new staring brick
buildings--the monster tentacles which the giant city was throwing
out into the country.  At last the cab drew up at the third house in
a new terrace.  None of the other houses was inhabited, and that at
which we stopped was as dark as its neighbors, save for a single
glimmer in the kitchen window.  On our knocking, however, the door
was instantly thrown open by a Hindu servant clad in a yellow turban,
white, loose-fitting clothes, and a yellow sash.  There was something
strangely incongruous in this Oriental figure framed in the
commonplace doorway of a third-rate suburban dwelling-house.

"The sahib awaits you," said he, and even as he spoke there came a
high piping voice from some inner room.  "Show them in to me,
khitmutgar," it cried.  "Show them straight in to me."



CHAPTER IV

_The Story of the Bald-Headed Man_

We followed the Indian down the sordid and common passage,
ill-lighted and worse furnished, until he came to a door upon the
right, which he threw open.  A blaze of yellow light streamed out
upon us, and in the centre of the glare there stood a small man with
a very high head, a bristle of red hair all round the fringe of it,
and a bald, shining scalp, which shot out from among it like a
mountain-peak from fir-trees.  He rubbed his hands together as he
stood, and his features were in a perpetual jerk, now smiling, now
scowling, but never for an instant in repose.  Nature had given him a
pendulous lip, and a too visible line of yellow and irregular teeth,
which he strove feebly to conceal by constantly passing his hand over
the lower part of his face.  In spite of his obtrusive baldness, he
gave the impression of youth.  In point of fact, he had just turned
his thirtieth year.

"Your servant, Miss Morstan," he kept repeating in a thin, high
voice.  "Your servant, gentlemen.  Pray step into my little sanctum.
A small place, miss, but furnished to my own liking.  An oasis of art
in the howling desert of South London."

We were all astonished by the appearance of the apartment into which
he invited us.  In that sorry house it looked as out of place as a
diamond of the first water in a setting of brass.  The richest and
glossiest of curtains and draperies draped the walls, looped back
here and there to expose some richly mounted painting or Oriental
vase.  The carpet was of amber and black, so soft and so thick that
the foot sank pleasantly into it, as into a bed of moss.  Two great
tiger-skins thrown athwart it increased the suggestion of Eastern
luxury, as did a huge hookah which stood upon a mat in the corner.  A
lamp in the fashion of a silver dove was hung from an almost
invisible golden wire in the centre of the room.  As it burned it
filled the air with a subtle and aromatic odor.

"Mr. Thaddeus Sholto," said the little man, still jerking and
smiling.  "That is my name.  You are Miss Morstan, of course.  And
these gentlemen--"

"This is Mr. Sherlock Holmes, and this Doctor Watson."

"A doctor, eh?" cried he, much excited.  "Have you your stethoscope?
Might I ask you--would you have the kindness?  I have grave doubts as
to my mitral valve, if you would be so very good.  The aortic I may
rely upon, but I should value your opinion upon the mitral."

I listened to his heart as requested, but was unable to find anything
amiss, save indeed that he was in an ecstasy of fear, for he shivered
from head to foot.  "It appears to be normal," I said.  "You have no
cause for uneasiness."

"You will excuse my anxiety, Miss Morstan," he remarked, airily.  "I
am a great sufferer, and I have long had suspicions as to that valve.
I am delighted to hear that they are unwarranted.  Had your father,
Miss Morstan, refrained from throwing a strain upon his heart, he
might have been alive now."

I could have struck the man across the face, so hot was I at this
callous and offhand reference to so delicate a matter.  Miss Morstan
sat down, and her face grew white to the lips.  "I knew in my heart
that he was dead," said she.

"I can give you every information," said he, "and what is more, I can
do you justice; and I will, too, whatever brother Bartholomew may
say.  I am so glad to have your friends here, not only as an escort
to you, but also as witnesses to what I am about to do and say.  The
three of us can show a bold front to brother Bartholomew.  But let us
have no outsiders--no police or officials.  We can settle everything
satisfactorily among ourselves, without any interference.  Nothing
would annoy brother Bartholomew more than any publicity."  He sat
down upon a low settee and blinked at us inquiringly with his weak,
watery blue eyes.

"For my part," said Holmes, "whatever you may choose to say will go
no further."

I nodded to show my agreement.

"That is well!  That is well!" said he.  "May I offer you a glass of
Chianti, Miss Morstan? or of Tokay?  I keep no other wines.  Shall I
open a flask?  No?  Well, then, I trust that you have no objection to
tobacco-smoke, to the mild, balsamic odor of the Eastern tobacco.  I
am a little nervous, and I find my hookah an invaluable sedative."
He applied a taper to the great bowl, and the smoke bubbled merrily
through the rose-water.  We sat all three in a semicircle, with our
heads advanced, and our chins upon our hands, while the strange,
jerky little fellow, with his high, shining head, puffed uneasily in
the centre.

"When I first determined to make this communication to you," said he,
"I might have given you my address, but I feared that you might
disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you.  I took
the liberty, therefore, of making an appointment in such a way that
my man Williams might be able to see you first.  I have complete
confidence in his discretion, and he had orders, if he were
dissatisfied, to proceed no further in the matter.  You will excuse
these precautions, but I am a man of somewhat retiring, and, I might
even say, refined tastes, and there is nothing more unesthetic than a
policeman.  I have a natural shrinking from all forms of rough
materialism.  I seldom come in contact with the rough crowd.  I live,
as you see, with some little atmosphere of elegance around me.  I may
call myself a patron of the arts.  It is my weakness.  The landscape
is a genuine Corot, and, though a connoisseur might perhaps throw a
doubt upon that Salvator Rosa, there can not be the least question
about the Bouguereau.  I am partial to the modern French school."

"You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am here
at your request to learn something which you desire to tell me.  It
is very late, and I should desire the interview to be as short as
possible."

"At the best it must take some time," he answered; "for we shall
certainly have to go to Norwood and see brother Bartholomew.  We
shall all go and try if we can get the better of brother Bartholomew.
He is very angry with me for taking the course which has seemed right
to me.  I had quite high words with him last night.  You can not
imagine what a terrible fellow he is when he is angry."

"If we are to go to Norwood it would perhaps be as well to start at
once," I ventured to remark.

He laughed until his ears were quite red.  "That would hardly do," he
cried.  "I don't know what he would say if I brought you in that
sudden way.  No; I must prepare you by showing you how we all stand
to each other.  In the first place, I must tell you that there are
several points in the story of which I am myself ignorant.  I can
only lay the facts before you as far as I know them myself.

"My father was, as you may have guessed, Major John Sholto, once of
the Indian army.  He retired some eleven years ago, and came to live
at Pondicherry Lodge in Upper Norwood.  He had prospered in India,
and brought back with him a considerable sum of money, a large
collection of valuable curiosities, and a staff of native servants.
With these advantages he bought himself a house, and lived in great
luxury.  My twin-brother Bartholomew and I were the only children.

"I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the
disappearance of Captain Morstan.  We read the details in the papers,
and, knowing that he had been a friend of our father's, we discussed
the case freely in his presence.  He used to join in our speculations
as to what could have happened.  Never for an instant did we suspect
that he had the whole secret hidden in his own breast--that of all
men he alone knew the fate of Arthur Morstan.

"We did know, however, that some mystery--some positive
danger--overhung our father.  He was very fearful of going out alone,
and he always employed two prize-fighters to act as porters at
Pondicherry Lodge.  Williams, who drove you to-night, was one of
them.  He was once a light-weight champion of England.  Our father
would never tell us what it was he feared, but he had a most marked
aversion to men with wooden legs.  On one occasion he actually fired
his revolver at a wooden-legged man, who proved to be a harmless
tradesman canvassing for orders.  We had to pay a large sum to hush
the matter up.  My brother and I used to think this a mere whim of my
father's, but events have since led us to change our opinion.

"Early in 1882 my father received a letter from India which was a
great shock to him.  He nearly fainted at the breakfast-table when he
opened it, and from that day he sickened to his death.  What was in
the letter we could never discover, but I could see as he held it
that it was short and written in a scrawling hand.  He had suffered
for years from an enlarged spleen, but he now became rapidly worse,
and toward the end of April we were informed that he was beyond all
hope, and that he wished to make a last communication to us.

"When we entered his room he was propped up with pillows and
breathing heavily.  He besought us to lock the door and to come upon
either side of the bed.  Then, grasping our hands, he made a
remarkable statement to us, in a voice which was broken as much by
emotion as by pain.  I shall try and give it to you in his own very
words.

"'I have only one thing,' he said, 'which weighs upon my mind at this
supreme moment.  It is my treatment of poor Morstan's orphan.  The
cursed greed which has been my besetting sin through life has
withheld from her the treasure, half at least of which should have
been hers.  And yet I have made no use of it myself--so blind and
foolish a thing is avarice.  The mere feeling of possession has been
so dear to me that I could not bear to share it with another.  See
that chaplet tipped with pearls beside the quinine-bottle.  Even that
I could not bear to part with, although I had got it out with the
design of sending it to her.  You, my sons, will give her a fair
share of the Agra treasure.  But send her nothing--not even the
chaplet--until I am gone.  After all, men have been as bad as this
and have recovered.

"'I will tell you how Morstan died,' he continued.  'He had suffered
for years from a weak heart, but he concealed it from every one.  I
alone knew it.  When in India, he and I, through a remarkable chain
of circumstances, came into possession of a considerable treasure.  I
brought it over to England, and on the night of Morstan's arrival he
came straight over here to claim his share.  He walked over from the
station, and was admitted by my faithful old Lal Chowdar, who is now
dead.  Morstan and I had a difference of opinion as to the division
of the treasure, and we came to heated words.  Morstan had sprung out
of his chair in a paroxysm of anger, when he suddenly pressed his
hand to his side, his face turned a dusky hue, and he fell backward,
cutting his head against the corner of the treasure-chest.  When I
stooped over him I found, to my horror, that he was dead.

"'For a long time I sat half-distracted, wondering what I should do.
My first impulse was, of course, to call for assistance; but I could
not but recognize that there was every chance that I would be accused
of his murder.  His death at the moment of a quarrel, and the gash in
his head, would be black against me.  Again, an official inquiry
could not be made without bringing out some facts about the treasure
which I was particularly anxious to keep secret.  He had told me that
no soul upon earth knew where he had gone.  There seemed to be no
necessity why any soul ever should know.

"'I was still pondering over the matter, when, looking up, I saw my
servant, Lal Chowdar, in the doorway.  He stole in, and bolted the
door behind him.  "Do not fear, sahib," he said.  "No one need know
that you have killed him.  Let us hide him away, and who is the
wiser?"  "I did not kill him," said I.  Lal Chowdar shook his head,
and smiled.  "I heard it all, sahib," said he.  "I heard you quarrel,
and I heard the blow.  But my lips are sealed.  All are asleep in the
house.  Let us put him away together."  That was enough to decide me.
If my own servant could not believe my innocence, how could I hope to
make it good before twelve foolish tradesmen in a jury-box?  Lal
Chowdar and I disposed of the body that night, and within a few days
the London papers were full of the mysterious disappearance of
Captain Morstan.  You will see from what I say that I can hardly be
blamed in the matter.  My fault lies in the fact that we concealed,
not only the body, but also the treasure, and that I have clung to
Morstan's share as well as to my own.  I wish you, therefore, to make
restitution.  Put your ears down to my mouth.  The treasure is hidden
in--'  At this instant a horrible change came over his expression;
his eyes stared wildly, his jaw dropped, and he yelled, in a voice
which I can never forget, 'Keep him out!  For Christ's sake, keep him
out!'  We both stared round at the window behind us upon which his
gaze was fixed.  A face was looking in at us out of the darkness.  We
could see the whitening of the nose where it was pressed against the
glass.  It was a bearded, hairy face, with wild, cruel eyes and an
expression of concentrated malevolence.  My brother and I rushed
toward the window, but the man was gone.  When we returned to my
father, his head had dropped and his pulse had ceased to beat.

"We searched the garden that night, but found no sign of the
intruder, save that just under the window a single footmark was
visible in the flower-bed.  But for that one trace, we might have
thought that our imaginations had conjured up that wild, fierce face.
We soon, however, had another and a more striking proof that there
were secret agencies at work all around us.  The window of my
father's room was found open in the morning, his cupboards and boxes
had been rifled, and upon his chest was fixed a torn piece of paper
with the words, 'The sign of the four' scrawled across it.  What the
phrase meant, or who our secret visitor may have been, we never knew.
As far as we can judge, none of my father's property had been
actually stolen, though everything had been turned out.  My brother
and I naturally associated this peculiar incident with the fear which
haunted my father during his life; but it is still a complete mystery
to us."

The little man stopped to relight his hookah, and puffed thoughtfully
for a few moments.  We had all sat absorbed, listening to his
extraordinary narrative.  At the short account of her father's death
Miss Morstan had turned deathly white, and for a moment I feared that
she was about to faint.  She rallied, however, on drinking a glass of
water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon
the side table.  Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair with an
abstracted expression and the lids drawn over his glittering eyes.
As I glanced at him I could not but think how on that very day he had
complained bitterly of the commonplaceness of life.  Here, at least,
was a problem which would tax his sagacity to the utmost.  Mr.
Thaddeus Sholto looked from one to the other of us with an obvious
pride at the effect which his story had produced, and then continued
between the puffs of his overgrown pipe:

"My brother and I;" said he, "were, as you may imagine, much excited
as to the treasure which my father had spoken of.  For weeks and for
months we dug and delved in every part of the garden, without
discovering its whereabouts.  It was maddening to think that the
hiding-place was on his very lips at the moment that he died.  We
could judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet which
he had taken out.  Over this chaplet my brother Bartholomew and I had
some little discussion.  The pearls were evidently of great value,
and he was averse to part with them, for, between friends, my brother
was himself a little inclined to my father's fault.  He thought, too,
that if we parted with the chaplet it might give rise to gossip, and
finally bring us into trouble.  It was all that I could do to
persuade him to let me find out Miss Morstan's address and send her a
detached pearl at fixed intervals, so that, at least, she might never
feel destitute."

"It was a kindly thought," said our companion, earnestly.  "It was
extremely good of you."

The little man waved his hand deprecatingly.  "We were your
trustees," he said.  "That was the view which I took of it, though
brother Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light.  We
had plenty of money ourselves.  I desired no more.  Besides, it would
have been such bad taste to have treated a young lady in so scurvy a
fashion.  '_Le mauvais gout mene au crime_.'  The French have a very
neat way of putting these things.  Our difference of opinion on this
subject went so far that I thought it best to set up rooms for
myself; so I left Pondicherry Lodge, taking the old khitmutgar and
Williams with me.  Yesterday, however, I learned that an event of
extreme importance had occurred.  The treasure has been discovered.
I instantly communicated with Miss Morstan, and it only remains for
us to drive out to Norwood and demand our share.  I explained my
views last night to brother Bartholomew; so we shall be expected, if
not welcome, visitors."

Mr. Thaddeus Sholto ceased, and sat twitching on his luxurious
settee.  We all remained silent, with our thoughts upon the new
development which the mysterious business had taken.  Holmes was the
first to spring to his feet.

"You have done well, sir, from first to last," said he.  "It is
possible that we may be able to make you some small return by
throwing some light upon that which is still dark to you.  But, as
Miss Morstan remarked just now, it is late, and we had best put the
matter through without delay."

Our new acquaintance very deliberately coiled up the tube of his
hookah, and produced from behind a curtain a very long befrogged
top-coat with astrakhan collar and cuffs.  This he buttoned tightly
up, in spite of the extreme closeness of the night, and finished his
attire by putting on a rabbit-skin cap with hanging lappets which
covered the ears, so that no part of him was visible save his mobile
and peaky face.  "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he
led the way down the passage.  "I am compelled to be a
valetudinarian."

Our cab was awaiting us outside, and our program was evidently
prearranged, for the driver started off at once at a rapid pace.
Thaddeus Sholto talked incessantly, in a voice which rose high above
the rattle of the wheels.

"Bartholomew is a clever fellow," said he.  "How do you think he
found out where the treasure was?  He had come to the conclusion that
it was somewhere indoors; so he worked out all the cubic space of the
house, and made measurements everywhere, so that not one inch should
be unaccounted for.  Among other things, he found that the height of
the building was seventy-four feet, but on adding together the
heights of all the separate rooms, and making every allowance for the
space between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring
the total to more than seventy feet.  There were four feet
unaccounted for.  These could only be at the top of the building.  He
knocked a hole, therefore, in the lath and plaster ceiling of the
highest room, and there, sure enough, he came upon another little
garret above it, which had been sealed up and was known to no one.
In the centre stood the treasure-chest, resting upon two rafters.  He
lowered it through the hole, and there it lies.  He computes the
value of the jewels at not less than half a million sterling."

At the mention of this gigantic sum we all stared at one another
open-eyed.  Miss Morstan, could we secure her rights, would change
from a needy governess to the richest heiress in England.  Surely it
was the place of a loyal friend to rejoice at such news; yet I am
ashamed to say that selfishness took me by the soul, and that my
heart turned as heavy as lead within me.  I stammered out some few
halting words of congratulation, and then sat downcast, with my head
drooped, deaf to the babble of our new acquaintance.  He was clearly
a confirmed hypochondriac, and I was dreamily conscious that he was
pouring forth interminable trains of symptoms, and imploring
information as to the composition and action of innumerable quack
nostrums, some of which he bore about in a leather case in his
pocket.  I trust that he may not remember any of the answers which I
gave him that night.  Holmes declares that he overheard me caution
him against the great danger of taking more than two drops of castor
oil, while I recommended strychnine in larger doses as a sedative.
However that may be, I was certainly relieved when our cab pulled up
with a jerk and the coachman sprang down to open the door.

"This, Miss Morstan, is Pondicherry Lodge," said Mr. Thaddeus Sholto,
as he handed her out.



CHAPTER V

_The Tragedy of Pondicherry Lodge_

It was nearly eleven o'clock when we reached this final stage of our
night's adventures.  We had left the damp fog of the great city
behind us, and the night was fairly fine.  A warm wind blew from the
westward, and heavy clouds moved slowly across the sky, with half a
moon peeping occasionally through the rifts.  It was clear enough to
see for some distance, but Thaddeus Sholto took down one of the
side-lamps from the carriage to give us a better light upon our way.

Pondicherry Lodge stood in its own grounds, and was girt round with a
very high stone wall topped with broken glass.  A single narrow,
iron-clamped door formed the only means of entrance.  On this our
guide knocked with a peculiar postman-like rat-tat.

"Who is there?" cried a gruff voice from within.

"It is I, McMurdo.  You surely know my knock by this time."

There was a grumbling sound, and a clanking and jarring of keys.  The
door swung heavily back, and a short, deep-chested man stood in the
opening, with the yellow light of the lantern shining upon his
protruded face and twinkling, distrustful eyes.

"That you, Mr. Thaddeus?  But who are the others?  I had no orders
about them from the master."

"No, McMurdo?  You surprise me!  I told my brother last night that I
should bring some friends."

"He hain't been out o' his room to-day, Mr. Thaddeus, and I have no
orders.  You know very well that I must stick to regulations.  I can
let you in; but your friends they must just stop where they are."

This was an unexpected obstacle!  Thaddeus Sholto looked about him in
a perplexed and helpless manner.  "This is too bad of you, McMurdo!"
he said.  "If I guarantee them, that is enough for you.  There is a
young lady, too.  She can not wait on the public road at this hour."

"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably.  "Folk may
be friends o' yours, and yet no friends o' the master's.  He pays me
well to do my duty, and my duty I'll do.  I don't know none o' your
friends."

"Oh, yes, you do, McMurdo," cried Sherlock Holmes, genially.  "I
don't think you can have forgotten me.  Don't you remember the
amateur who fought three rounds with you at Alison's rooms on the
night of your benefit four years back?"

"Not Mr. Sherlock Holmes?" roared the prize-fighter.  "God's truth!
how could I have mistook you?  If, instead o' standin' there so
quiet, you had just stepped up and given me that cross-hit of yours
under the jaw, I'd ha' known you without a question.  Ah, you're one
that has wasted your gifts, you have!  You might have aimed high, if
you had joined the fancy."

"You see, Watson, if all else fails me I have still one of the
scientific professions open to me," said Holmes, laughing.  "Our
friend won't keep us out in the cold now, I am sure."

"In you come, sir; in you come--you and your friends," he answered.
"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus, but orders are very strict.  Had to be
certain of your friends before I let them in."

Inside a gravel path wound through desolate grounds to a huge clump
of a house, square and prosaic, all plunged in shadow save where a
moonbeam struck one corner and glimmered in a garret window.  The
vast size of the building, with its gloom and its deathly silence,
struck a chill to the heart.  Even Thaddeus Sholto seemed ill at
ease, and the lantern quivered and rattled in his hand.

"I can not understand it," he said.  "There must be some mistake.  I
distinctly told Bartholomew that we should be here, and yet there is
no light in his window.  I do not know what to make of it."

"Does he always guard the premises in this way?" asked Holmes.

"Yes; he has followed my father's custom.  He was the favorite son,
you know, and I sometimes think that my father may have told him more
than he ever told me.  That is Bartholomew's window up there where
the moonshine strikes.  It is quite bright, but there is no light
from within, I think."

"None," said Holmes.  "But I see the glint of a light in that little
window beside the door."

"Ah, that is the housekeeper's room.  That is where old Mrs.
Bernstone sits.  She can tell us all about it.  But perhaps you would
not mind waiting here for a minute or two, for if we all go in
together, and she has had no word of our coming, she may be alarmed.
But hush! what is that?"

He held up the lantern, and his hand shook until the circles of light
flickered and wavered all round us.  Miss Morstan seized my wrist,
and we all stood with thumping hearts, straining our ears.  From the
great black house there sounded through the silent night the saddest
and most pitiful of sounds--the shrill, broken whimpering of a
frightened woman.

"It is Mrs. Bernstone," said Sholto.  "She is the only woman in the
house.  Wait here, I shall be back in a moment."  He hurried for the
door, and knocked in his peculiar way.  We could see a tall old woman
admit him and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.

"Oh, Mr. Thaddeus, sir, I am so glad you have come!  I am so glad you
have come, Mr. Thaddeus, sir!"  We heard her reiterated rejoicings
until the door was closed and her voice died away into a muffled
monotone.

Our guide had left us the lantern.  Holmes swung it slowly round, and
peered keenly at the house and at the great rubbish-heaps which
cumbered the grounds.  Miss Morstan and I stood together, and her
hand was in mine.  A wondrous subtle thing is love, for here were we
two who had never seen each other before that day, between whom no
word or even look of affection had ever passed, and yet now in an
hour of trouble our hands instinctively sought for each other.  I
have marveled at it since, but at the time it seemed the most natural
thing that I should go out to her so, and, as she has often told me,
there was in her also the instinct to turn to me for comfort and
protection.  So we stood hand in hand, like two children, and there
was peace in our hearts for all the dark things that surrounded us.

"What a strange place!" she said, looking round.

"It looks as though all the moles in England had been let loose in
it.  I have seen something of the sort on the side of a hill near
Ballarat, where the prospectors had been at work."

"And from the same cause," said Holmes.  "These are the traces of the
treasure-seekers.  You must remember that they were six years looking
for it.  No wonder that the grounds look like a gravel-pit."

At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
came running out, with his hands thrown forward and terror in his
eyes.

"There is something amiss with Bartholomew!" he cried.  "I am
frightened!  My nerves can not stand it."  He was, indeed,
half-blubbering with fear, and his twitching, feeble face, peeping
out from the great astrakhan collar, had the helpless, appealing
expression of a terrified child.

"Come into the house," said Holmes, in his crisp, firm way.

"Yes, do!" pleaded Thaddeus Sholto.  "I really do not feel equal to
giving directions."

We all followed him into the housekeeper's room, which stood upon the
left-hand side of the passage.  The old woman was pacing up and down
with a scared look and restless, picking fingers, but the sight of
Miss Morstan appeared to have a soothing effect upon her.

"God bless your sweet calm face!" she cried, with a hysterical sob.
"It does me good to see you.  Oh, but I have been sorely tried this
day!"

Our companion patted her thin, work-worn hand, and murmured some few
words of kindly, womanly comfort which brought the color back into
the other's bloodless cheeks.

"Master has locked himself in and will not answer me," she explained.
"All day I have waited to hear from him, for he often likes to be
alone; but an hour ago I feared that something was amiss, so I went
up and peeped through the keyhole.  You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus--you
must go up and look for yourself.  I have seen Mr. Bartholomew Sholto
in joy and in sorrow for ten long years, but I never saw him with
such a face on him as that."

Sherlock Holmes took the lamp and led the way, for Thaddeus Sholto's
teeth were chattering in his head.  So shaken was he that I had to
pass my hand under his arm as we went up the stairs, for his knees
were trembling under him.  Twice as we ascended Holmes whipped his
lens out of his pocket and carefully examined marks which appeared to
me to be mere shapeless smudges of dust upon the cocoanut matting
which served as a stair-carpet.  He walked slowly from step to step,
holding the lamp low, and shooting keen glances to right and left.
Miss Morstan had remained behind with the frightened housekeeper.

The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some
length, with a great picture in Indian tapestry upon the right of it
and three doors upon the left.  Holmes advanced along it in the same
slow and methodical way, while we kept close at his heels, with our
long black shadows streaming backward down the corridor.  The third
door was that which we were seeking.  Holmes knocked without
receiving any answer, and then tried to turn the handle and force it
open.  It was locked on the inside, however, and by a broad and
powerful bolt, as we could see when we set our lamp up against it.
The key being turned, however, the hole was not entirely closed.
Sherlock Holmes bent down to it, and instantly rose again with a
sharp intaking of the breath.

"There is something devilish in this, Watson," said he, more moved
than I had ever before seen him.  "What do you make of it?"

I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror.  Moonlight was
streaming into the room, and it was bright with a vague and shifty
radiance.  Looking straight at me, and suspended, as it were, in the
air, for all beneath was in shadow, there hung a face--the very face
of our companion Thaddeus.  There was the same high, shining head,
the same circular bristle of red hair, the same bloodless
countenance.  The features were set, however, in a horrible smile, a
fixed and unnatural grin, which, in that still and moonlit room, was
more jarring to the nerves than any scowl or contortion.  So like was
the face to that of our little friend that I looked round at him to
make sure that he was indeed with us.  Then I recalled to mind that
he had mentioned to us that his brother and he were twins.

"This is terrible!" I said to Holmes.  "What is to be done?"

"The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, he
put all his weight upon the lock.  It creaked and groaned, but did
not yield.  Together we flung ourselves upon it once more, and this
time it gave way with a sudden snap, and we found ourselves within
Bartholomew Sholto's chamber.

It appeared to have been fitted up as a chemical laboratory.  A
double line of glass-stoppered bottles was drawn up upon the wall
opposite the door, and the table was littered over with Bunsen
burners, test-tubes, and retorts.  In the corners stood carboys of
acid in wicker baskets.  One of these appeared to leak or to have
been broken, for a stream of dark-colored liquid had trickled out
from it, and the air was heavy with a peculiarly pungent, tar-like
odor.  A set of steps stood at one side of the room, in the midst of
a litter of lath and plaster, and above them there was an opening in
the ceiling large enough for a man to pass through.  At the foot of
the steps a long coil of rope was thrown carelessly together.

By the table, in a wooden armchair, the master of the house was
seated all in a heap, with his head sunk upon his left shoulder, and
that ghastly, inscrutable smile upon his face.  He was stiff and
cold, and had clearly been dead many hours.  It seemed to me that not
only his features but all his limbs were twisted and turned in the
most fantastic fashion.  By his hand upon the table there lay a
peculiar instrument--a brown, close-grained stick, with a stone head
like a hammer, rudely lashed on with coarse twine.  Beside it was a
torn sheet of note-paper with some words scrawled upon it.  Holmes
glanced at it, and then handed it to me.

"You see," he said, with a significant raising of the eyebrows.

In the light of the lantern I read, with a thrill of horror, "The
sign of the four."

"In God's name, what does it all mean?" I asked.

"It means murder," said he, stooping over the dead man.  "Ah, I
expected it.  Look here!" He pointed to what looked like a long, dark
thorn stuck in the skin just above the ear.

"It looks like a thorn," said I.

"It is a thorn.  You may pick it out.  But be careful, for it is
poisoned."

I took it up between my finger and thumb.  It came away from the skin
so readily that hardly any mark was left behind.  One tiny speck of
blood showed where the puncture had been.

"This is all an insoluble mystery to me," said I.  "It grows darker
instead of clearer."

"On the contrary," he answered, "it clears every instant.  I only
require a few missing links to have an entirely connected case."

We had almost forgotten our companion's presence since we entered the
chamber.  He was still standing in the doorway, the very picture of
terror, wringing his hands and moaning to himself.  Suddenly,
however, he broke out into a sharp, querulous cry.

"The treasure is gone!" he said.  "They have robbed him of the
treasure!  There is the hole through which we lowered it.  I helped
him to do it!  I was the last person who saw him!  I left him here
last night, and I heard him lock the door as I came downstairs."

"What time was that?"

"It was ten o'clock.  And now he is dead, and the police will be
called in, and I shall be suspected of having had a hand in it.  Oh,
yes, I am sure I shall.  But you don't think so, gentlemen?  Surely
you don't think that it was I?  Is it likely that I would have
brought you here if it were I?  Oh, dear! oh, dear!  I know that I
shall go mad!"  He jerked his arms and stamped his feet in a kind of
convulsive frenzy.

"You have no reason to fear, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes, kindly,
putting his hand upon his shoulder.  "Take my advice, and drive down
to the station and report the matter to the police.  Offer to assist
them in every way.  We shall wait here until your return."

The little man obeyed in a half-stupefied fashion, and we heard him
stumbling down the stairs in the dark.



CHAPTER VI

_Sherlock Holmes Gives a Demonstration_

"Now, Watson," said Holmes, rubbing his hands, "we have half an hour
to ourselves.  Let us make good use of it.  My case is, as I have
told you, almost complete; but we must not err on the side of
overconfidence.  Simple as the case seems now, there may be something
deeper underlying it."

"Simple!" I ejaculated.

"Surely," said he, with something of the air of a clinical professor
expounding to his class.  "Just sit in the corner there, that your
footprints may not complicate matters.  Now to work!  In the first
place, how did these folks come, and how did they go?  The door has
not been opened since last night.  How of the window?"  He carried
the lamp across to it, muttering his observations aloud the while,
but addressing them to himself rather than to me.  "Window is snibbed
on the inner side.  Framework is solid.  No hinges at the side.  Let
us open it.  No water-pipe near it.  Roof quite out of reach.  Yet a
man has mounted by the window.  It rained a little last night.  Here
is the print of a foot in mold upon the sill.  And here is a circular
muddy mark, and here again upon the floor, and here again by the
table.  See here, Watson!  This is really a very pretty
demonstration."

I looked at the round, well-defined, muddy disks.  "This is not a
footmark," said I.

"It is something much more valuable to us.  It is the impression of a
wooden stump.  You see here on the sill is the boot-mark, a heavy
boot with a broad metal heel, and beside it is the mark of the
timber-toe."

"It is the wooden-legged man."

"Quite so.  But there has been some one else--a very able and
efficient ally.  Could you scale that wall, doctor?"

I looked out of the open window.  The moon still shone brightly on
that angle of the house.  We were a good sixty feet from the ground,
and, look where I would, I could see no foothold, nor as much as a
crevice in the brick-work.

"It is absolutely impossible," I answered.

"Without aid it is so.  But suppose you had a friend up here who
lowered you this good stout rope which I see in the corner, securing
one end of it to this great hook in the wall.  Then, I think, if you
were an active man you might climb up, wooden leg and all.  You would
depart, of course, in the same fashion, and your ally would draw up
the rope, untie it from the hook, shut the window, snib it on the
inside, and get away in the way that he originally came.  As a minor
point it may be noted," he continued, fingering the rope, "that our
wooden-legged friend, though a fair climber, was not a professional
sailor.  His hands were far from horny.  My lens discloses more than
one blood-mark, especially toward the end of the rope, from which I
gather that he slipped down with such velocity that he took the skin
off his hands."

"This is all very well," said I, "but the thing becomes more
unintelligible than ever.  How about this mysterious ally?  How came
he into the room?"

"Yes, the ally!" repeated Holmes, pensively.  "There are features of
interest about this ally.  He lifts the case from the regions of the
commonplace.  I fancy that this ally breaks fresh ground in the
annals of crime in this country--though parallel cases suggest
themselves from India, and, if my memory serves me, from Senegambia."

"How came he, then?" I reiterated.  "The door is locked, the window
is inaccessible.  Was it through the chimney?"

"The grate is much too small," he answered.  "I have already
considered that possibility."

"How then?" I persisted.

"You will not apply my precept," he said, shaking his head.  "How
often have I said to you that when you have eliminated the
impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth?
We know that he did not come through the door, the window, or the
chimney.  We also know that he could not have been concealed in the
room, as there is no concealment possible.  Where, then, did he come?"

"He came through the hole in the roof," I cried.

"Of course he did.  He must have done so.  If you will have the
kindness to hold the lamp for me, we shall now extend our researches
to the room above--the secret room in which the treasure was found."

He mounted the steps, and, seizing a rafter with either hand, he
swung himself up into the garret.  Then, lying on his face, he
reached down for the lamp and held it while I followed him.

The chamber in which we found ourselves was about ten feet one way
and six the other.  The floor was formed by the rafters, with thin
lath and plaster between them, so that in walking one had to step
from beam to beam.  The roof ran up to an apex, and was evidently the
inner shell of the true roof of the house.  There was no furniture of
any sort, and the accumulated dust of years lay thick upon the floor.

"Here you are, you see," said Sherlock Holmes, putting his hand
against the sloping wall.  "This is a trap-door which leads out on to
the roof.  I can press it back, and here is the roof itself, sloping
at a gentle angle.  This, then, is the way by which Number One
entered.  Let us see if we can find some other traces of his
individuality."

He held down the lamp to the floor, and as he did so I saw for the
second time that night a startled, surprised look come over his face.
For myself, as I followed his gaze, my skin was cold under my
clothes.  The floor was covered thickly with the prints of a naked
foot--clear, well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size
of those of an ordinary man.

"Holmes," I said, in a whisper, "a child has done this horrid thing."

He had recovered his self-possession in an instant.  "I was staggered
for the moment," he said, "but the thing is quite natural.  My memory
failed me, or I should have been able to foretell it.  There is
nothing more to be learned here.  Let us go down."

"What is your theory, then, as to those foot-marks?" I asked,
eagerly, when we had regained the lower room once more.

"My dear Watson, try a little analysis yourself," said he, with a
touch of impatience.  "You know my methods.  Apply them; and it will
be instructive to compare results."

"I can not conceive anything which will cover the facts," I answered.

"It will be clear enough to you soon," he said, in an off-hand way.
"I think that there is nothing else of importance here, but I will
look."  He whipped out his lens and a tape-measure, and comparing,
examining, with his long thin nose only a few inches from the planks,
and his beady eyes gleaming and deep-set like those of a bird.  So
swift, silent, and furtive were his movements, like those of a
trained bloodhound picking out a scent, that I could not but think
what a terrible criminal he would have made had he turned his energy
and sagacity against the law instead of exerting them in its defense.
As he hunted about, he kept muttering to himself, and finally he
broke out into a loud crow of delight.

"We are certainly in luck," said he.  "We ought to have very little
trouble now.  Number One has had the misfortune to tread in the
creosote.  You can see the outline of the edge of his small foot here
at the right of this evil-smelling mess.  The carboy has been
cracked, you see, and the stuff has leaked out."

"What then?" I asked.

"Why, we have got him, that's all," said he.  "I know a dog that
would follow that scent to the world's end.  If a pack can track a
trailed herring across a shire, how far can a specially trained hound
follow so pungent a smell as this?  It sounds like a sum in the rule
of three.  The answer should give us the--  But halloo! here are the
accredited representatives of the law."

Heavy steps and the clamor of loud voices were audible from below,
and the hall door shut with a loud crash.

"Before they come," said Holmes, "just put your hand here on this
poor fellow's arm, and here on his leg.  What do you feel?"

"The muscles are as hard as a board," I answered.

"Quite so.  They are in a state of extreme contraction, far exceeding
the usual 'rigor mortis.'  Coupled with this distortion of the face,
this Hippocratic smile, or 'risus sardonicus,' as the old writers
called it, what conclusion would it suggest to your mind?"

"Death from some powerful vegetable alkaloid," I answered; "some
strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."

"That was the idea which occurred to me the instant I saw the drawn
muscles of the face.  On getting into the room I at once looked for
the means by which the poison had entered the system.  As you saw, I
discovered a thorn which had been driven or shot with no great force
into the scalp.  You observe that the part struck was that which
would be turned toward the hole in the ceiling if the man were erect
in his chair.  Now examine this thorn."

I took it up gingerly and held it in the light of the lantern.  It
was long, sharp, and black, with a glazed look near the point as
though some gummy substance had dried upon it.  The blunt end had
been trimmed and rounded off with a knife.

"Is that an English thorn?" he asked.

"No, it certainly is not."

"With all these data you should be able to draw some just inference.
But here are the regulars; so the auxiliary forces may beat a
retreat."

As he spoke, the steps which had been coming nearer sounded loudly on
the passage, and a very stout, portly man in a gray suit strode
heavily into the room.  He was red-faced, burly, and plethoric, with
a pair of very small twinkling eyes which looked keenly out from
between swollen and puffy pouches.  He was closely followed by an
inspector in uniform, and by the still palpitating Thaddeus Sholto.

"Here's a business!" he cried, in a muffled, husky voice.  "Here's a
pretty business!  But who are all these?  Why, the house seems to be
as full as a rabbit-warren."

"I think you must recollect me, Mr. Athelney Jones," said Holmes
quietly.

"Why, of course I do!" he wheezed.  "It's Mr. Sherlock Holmes, the
theorist.  Remember you!  I'll never forget how you lectured us all
on causes, and inferences, and effects in the Bishopsgate jewel case.
It's true you set us on the right track, but you'll own now that it
was more by good luck than good guidance."

"It was a piece of very simple reasoning."

"Oh, come, now, come!  Never be ashamed to own up.  But what is all
this?  Bad business!  Bad business!  Stern facts here--no room for
theories.  How lucky that I happened to be out at Norwood over
another case!  I was at the station when the message arrived.  What
d'you think the man died of?"

"Oh, this is hardly a case for me to theorize over," said Holmes,
dryly.

"No, no.  Still, we can't deny that you hit the nail on the head
sometimes.  Dear me!  Door locked, I understand.  Jewels worth half a
million missing.  How was the window?"

"Fastened; but there are steps on the sill."

"Well, well; if it was fastened, the steps could have nothing to do
with the matter.  That's common sense.  Man might have died in a fit;
but then the jewels are missing.  Ha!  I have a theory.  These
flashes come upon me at times.  Just step outside, sergeant, and you,
Mr. Sholto.  Your friend can remain.  What do you think of this,
Holmes?  Sholto was, on his own confession, with his brother last
night.  The brother died in a fit, on which Sholto walked off with
the treasure.  How's that?"

"On which the dead man very considerately got up and locked the door
on the inside."

"Hum!  There's a flaw there.  Let us apply common sense to the
matter.  This Thaddeus Sholto was with his brother; there was a
quarrel; so much we know.  The brother is dead and the jewels are
gone.  So much also we know.  No one saw the brother from the time
Thaddeus left him.  His bed had not been slept in.  Thaddeus is
evidently in a most disturbed state of mind.  His appearance
is--well, not attractive.  You see that I am weaving my web round
Thaddeus.  The net begins to close upon him."

"You are not quite in possession of the facts yet," said Holmes.
"This splinter of wood, which I have every reason to believe to be
poisoned, was in the man's scalp where you still see the mark; this
card, inscribed as you see it, was on the table; and beside it lay
this rather curious stone-headed instrument.  How does all this fit
into your theory?"

"Confirms it in every respect," said the fat detective, pompously.
"House is full of Indian curiosities.  Thaddeus brought this up, and
if this splinter be poisonous Thaddeus may as well have made
murderous use of it as any other man.  The card is some
hocus-pocus--a blind, as like as not.  The only question is, How did
he depart?  Ah, of course, here is a hole in the roof."  With great
activity, considering his bulk, he sprang up the steps and squeezed
through into the garret, and immediately afterward we heard his
exulting voice proclaiming that he had found the trapdoor.

"He can find something," remarked Holmes, shrugging his shoulders.
"He has occasional glimmerings of reason.  _I'l n'y a pas des sots si
incommodes que ceux qui ont de l'esprit!_"

"You see!" said Athelney Jones, reappearing down the steps again.
"Facts are better than mere theories, after all.  My view of the case
is confirmed.  There is a trap-door communicating with the roof, and
it is partly open."

"It was I who opened it."

"Oh, indeed!  You did notice it, then?"  He seemed a little
crestfallen at the discovery.  "Well, whoever noticed it, it shows
how our gentleman got away.  Inspector!"

"Yes, sir," from the passage.

"Ask Mr. Sholto to step this way.  Mr. Sholto, it is my duty to
inform you that anything which you may say will be used against you.
I arrest you in the queen's name as being concerned in the death of
your brother."

"There, now!  Didn't I tell you?" cried the poor little man, throwing
out his hands, and looking from one to the other of us.

"Don't trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes.  "I think
that I can engage to clear you of the charge."

"Don't promise too much, Mr. Theorist--don't promise too much!"
snapped the detective.  "You may find it a harder matter than you
think."

"Not only will I clear him, Mr. Jones, but I will make you a free
present of the name and description of one of the two people who were
in the room last night.  His name, I have every reason to believe, is
Jonathan Small.  He is a poorly educated man; small, active, with his
right leg off, and wearing a wooden stump which is worn away upon the
inner side.  His left boot has a coarse, square-toed sole, with an
iron band round the heel.  He is a middle-aged man, much sunburned,
and has been a convict.  These few indications may be of some
assistance to you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of
skin missing from the palm of his hand.  The other man--"

"Ah! the other man?" asked Athelney Jones, in a sneering voice, but
impressed none the less, as I could easily see, by the precision of
the other's manner.

"Is a rather curious person," said Sherlock Holmes, turning upon his
heel.  "I hope before very long to be able to introduce you to the
pair of them.  A word with you, Watson."

He led me out to the head of the stair.  "This unexpected
occurrence," he said, "has caused us rather to lose sight of the
original purpose of our journey."

"I have just been thinking so," I answered.  "It is not right that
Miss Morstan should remain in this stricken house."

"No.  You must escort her home.  She lives with Mrs. Cecil Forrester,
in Lower Camberwell; so it is not very far.  I will wait for you
here, if you will drive out again.  Or perhaps you are too tired?"

"By no means.  I don't think I could rest until I know more of this
fantastic business.  I have seen something of the rough side of life,
but I give you my word that this quick succession of strange
surprises to-night has shaken my nerve completely.  I should like,
however, to see the matter through with you, now that I have got so
far."

"Your presence will be of great service to me," he answered.  "We
shall work the case out independently, and leave this fellow Jones to
exult over any mare's-nest which he may choose to construct.  When
you have dropped Miss Morstan I wish you to go to No. 3 Pinchin Lane,
down near the water's edge, at Lambeth.  The third house on the
right-hand side is a bird-stuffer's; Sherman is the name.  You will
see a weasel holding a young rabbit in the window.  Rouse old Sherman
up, and tell him, with my compliments, that I want Toby at once.  You
will bring Toby back in the cab with you."

"A dog, I suppose?"

"Yes, a queer mongrel, with a most amazing power of scent.  I would
rather have Toby's help than that of the whole detective force of
London."

"I shall bring him, then," said I.  "It is one now.  I ought to be
back before three, if I can get a fresh horse."

"And I," said Holmes, "shall see what I can learn from Mrs.
Bernstone, and from the Indian servant, who, Mr. Thaddeus tells me,
sleeps in the next garret.  Then I shall study the great Jones's
methods, and listen to his not too delicate sarcasms.  '_Wir sind
gewohnt, dass die Menschen verhohnen was sie nicht verstehen._'
Goethe is always pithy."



CHAPTER VII

The Episode of the Barrel

The police had brought a cab with them, and in this I escorted Miss
Morstan back to her home.  After the angelic fashion of women, she
had borne trouble with a calm face as long as there was some one
weaker than herself to support, and I had found her bright and placid
by the side of the frightened housekeeper.  In the cab, however, she
first turned faint, and then burst into a passion of weeping, so
sorely had she been tried by the adventures of the night.

She has told me since that she thought me cold and distant upon that
journey.  She little guessed the struggle within my breast, or the
effort of self-restraint which held me back.  My sympathies and my
love went out to her, even as my hand had in the garden.  I felt that
years of the conventionalities of life could not teach me to know her
sweet, brave nature as had this one day of strange experiences.  Yet
there were two thoughts which sealed the words of affection upon my
lips.  She was weak and helpless, shaken in mind and nerve.  It was
to take her at a disadvantage to obtrude love upon her at such a
time.  Worse still she was rich.  If Holmes's researches were
successful, she would be an heiress.  Was it fair, was it honorable,
that a half-pay surgeon should take such advantage of an intimacy
which chance had brought about?  Might she not look upon me as a mere
vulgar fortune-seeker?  I could not bear to risk that such a thought
should cross her mind.  This Agra treasure intervened like an
impassable barrier between us.

It was nearly two o'clock when we reached Mrs. Cecil Forrester's.
The servants had retired hours ago, but Mrs. Forrester had been so
interested by the strange message which Miss Morstan had received,
that she had sat up in the hope of her return.  She opened the door
herself, a middle-aged, graceful woman, and it gave me joy to see how
tenderly her arm stole round the other's waist, and how motherly was
the voice in which she greeted her.  She was clearly no mere paid
dependent, but an honored friend.  I was introduced, and Mrs.
Forrester earnestly begged me to step in and to tell her our
adventures.  I explained, however, the importance of my errand, and
promised faithfully to call and report any progress which we might
make with the case.  As we drove away I stole a glance back, and I
still seem to see that little group on the step, the two graceful,
clinging figures, the half-opened door, the hall light shining
through stained glass, the barometer, and the bright stair-rods.  It
was soothing to catch even that passing glimpse of a tranquil English
home in the midst of the wild, dark business which had absorbed us.

And the more I thought of what had happened, the wilder and darker it
grew.  I reviewed the whole extraordinary sequence of events as I
rattled on through the silent, gas-lighted streets.  There was the
original problem: that at least was pretty clear now.  The death of
Captain Morstan, the sending of the pearls, the advertisement, the
letter--we had had light upon all those events.  They had only led
us, however, to a deeper and far more tragic mystery.  The Indian
treasure, the curious plan found among Morstan's baggage, the strange
scene at Major Sholto's death, the rediscovery of the treasure
immediately followed by the murder of the discoverer, the very
singular accompaniments to the crime, the footsteps, the remarkable
weapons, the words upon the card, corresponding with those upon
Captain Morstan's chart--here was indeed a labyrinth in which a man
less singularly endowed than my fellow-lodger might well despair at
ever finding the clue.

Pinchin Lane was a row of shabby two-storied brick houses in the
lower quarter of Lambeth.  I had to knock for some time at No. 3
before I could make any impression.  At last, however, there was the
glint of a candle behind the blind, and a face looked out at the
upper window.

"Go on, you drunken vagabond!" said the face.  "If you kick up any
more row I'll open the kennels and let out forty-three dogs at you."

"If you'll let one out it's just what I have come for," said I.

"Go on!" yelled the voice.  "So help me gracious, I have a wiper in
this bag, an' I'll drop it on your 'ead if you don't book it!"

"But I want a dog," I cried.

"I won't be argued with!" shouted Mr. Sherman.  "Now stand clear; for
when I say 'three,' down goes the wiper."

"Mr. Sherlock Holmes--" I began; but the words had a most magical
effect, for the window instantly slammed down, and within a minute
the door was unbarred and open.  Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old
man, with stooping shoulders, a stringy neck, and blue-tinted glasses.

"A friend of Mr. Sherlock is always welcome," said he.  "Step in,
sir.  Keep clear of the badger; for he bites.  Ah, naughty, naughty!
would you take a nip at the gentleman?"  This to a stoat which thrust
its wicked head and red eyes between the bars of its cage.  "Don't
mind that, sir; it's only a slow-worm.  It hain't got no fangs, so I
gives it the run o' the room, for it keeps the beetles down.  You
must not mind my bein' just a little short wi' you at first, for I'm
guyed by the children, and there's many a one just comes down this
lane to rouse me up.  What was it that Mr. Sherlock Holmes wanted,
sir?"

"He wanted a dog of yours."

"Ah! that would be Toby."

"Yes, Toby was the name."

"Toby lives at No. 7, on the left here."  He moved slowly forward
with his candle among the queer animal family which he had gathered
round him.  In the uncertain, shadowy light I could see dimly that
there were glancing, glimmering eyes peeping down at us from every
cranny and corner.  Even the rafters above our heads were lined by
solemn fowls, who lazily shifted their weight from one leg to the
Other as our voices disturbed their slumbers.

Toby proved to be an ugly, long-haired, lop-eared creature, half
spaniel and half lurcher, brown and white in color, with a very
clumsy waddling gait.  It accepted, after some hesitation, a lump of
sugar which the old naturalist handed to me, and having thus sealed
an alliance, it followed me to the cab, and made no difficulties
about accompanying me.  It had just struck three on the Palace clock
when I found myself back once more at Pondicherry Lodge.  The
ex-prize-fighter, McMurdo, had, I found, been arrested as an
accessory, and both he and Mr. Sholto had been marched off to the
station.  Two constables guarded the narrow gate, but they allowed me
to pass with the dog on my mentioning the detective's name.

Holmes was standing on the doorstep, with his hands in his pockets,
smoking his pipe.

"Ah, you have him there!" said he.  "Good dog, then!  Athelney Jones
has gone.  We have had an immense display of energy since you left.
He has arrested not only friend Thaddeus, but the gatekeeper, the
housekeeper, and the Indian servant.  We have the place to ourselves
but for a sergeant upstairs.  Leave the dog here and come up."

We tied Toby to the hall table, and reascended the stairs.  The room
was as we had left it, save that a sheet had been draped over the
central figure.  A weary-looking police-sergeant reclined in the
corner.

"Lend me your bull's-eye, sergeant," said my companion.  "Now tie
this bit of card round my neck, so as to hang it in front of me.
Thank you.  Now I must kick off my boots and stockings.  Just you
carry them down with you, Watson.  I am going to do a little
climbing.  And dip my handkerchief into the creosote.  That will do.
Now come up into the garret with me for a moment."

We clambered up through the hole.  Holmes turned his light once more
upon the footsteps in the dust.

"I wish particularly to notice these foot-marks," he said.  "Do you
observe anything noteworthy about them?"

"They belong," I said, "to a child or a small woman."

"Apart from their size, though.  Is there nothing else?"

"They appear to be much as other foot-marks."

"Not at all.  Look here!  This is the print of a right foot in the
dust.  Now I make one with my naked foot beside it.  What is the
chief difference?"

"Your toes are all cramped together.  The other print has each toe
distinctly divided."

"Quite so.  That is the point.  Bear that in mind.  Now, would you
kindly step over to that flap-window and smell the edge of the
woodwork?  I shall stay over here as I have this handkerchief in my
hand."

I did as he directed, and was instantly conscious of a strong tarry
smell.

"That is where he put his foot in getting out.  If you can trace him,
I should think that Toby will have no difficulty.  Now run
downstairs, loose the dog, and look out for Blondin."

By the time that I got out into the grounds, Sherlock Holmes was on
the roof, and I could see him like an enormous glowworm crawling very
slowly along the ridge.  I lost sight of him behind a stack of
chimneys, but he presently reappeared, and then vanished once more
upon the opposite side.  When I made my way round there I found him
seated at one of the corner eaves.

"That you, Watson?" he cried.

"Yes."

"This is the place.  What is that black thing down there?'

"A water-barrel."

"Top on it?"

"Yes."

"No sign of a ladder?"

"No."

"Confound the fellow!  It's a most break-neck place, I ought to be
able to come down where he could climb up.  The water-pipe feels
pretty firm.  Here goes, anyhow."

There was a shuffling of the feet, and the lantern began to come
steadily down the side of the wall.  Then with a light spring he came
on to the barrel, and from there to the earth.

"It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings and
boots.  "Tiles were loosened the whole way along, and in his hurry he
had dropped this.  It confirms my diagnosis, as you doctors express
it."

The object which he held up to me was a small pocket or pouch woven
out of colored grasses and with a few tawdry beads strung round it.
In shape and size it was not unlike a cigarette-case.  Inside were
half a dozen spines of dark wood, sharp at one end and rounded at the
other, like that which had struck Bartholomew Sholto.

"They are hellish things," said he.  "Look out that you don't prick
yourself.  I'm delighted to have them, for the chances are that they
are all he has.  There is the less fear of you or me finding one in
our skin before long.  I would sooner face a Martini bullet myself.
Are you game for a six-mile trudge, Watson?"

"Certainly," I answered.

"Your leg will stand it?"

"Oh, yes."

"Here you are, doggy!  Good old Toby!  Smell it, Toby; smell it!"  He
pushed the creosote handkerchief under the dog's nose, while the
creature stood with its fluffy legs separated, and with a most
comical cock to its head, like a connoisseur sniffing the bouquet of
a famous vintage.  Holmes then threw the handkerchief to a distance,
fastened a stout cord to the mongrel's collar, and led him to the
foot of the water-barrel.  The creature instantly broke into a
succession of high, tremulous yelps, and, with his nose on the ground
and his tail in the air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which
strained his leash and kept us at the top of our speed.

The east had been gradually whitening, and we could now see some
distance in the cold, gray light.  The square, massive house, with
its black, empty windows and high, bare walls, towered up, sad and
forlorn, behind us.  Our course led right across the grounds, in and
out among the trenches and pits with which they were scarred and
intersected.  The whole place, with its scattered dirt-heaps and
ill-grown shrubs, had a blighted, ill-omened look which harmonized
with the black tragedy which hung over it.

On reaching the boundary wall Toby ran along, whining eagerly,
underneath its shadow, and stopped finally in a corner screened by a
young beech.  Where the two walls joined, several bricks had been
loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
lower side, as though they had frequently been used as a ladder.
Holmes clambered up, and, taking the dog from me, he dropped it over
upon the other side.

"There's the print of wooden-leg's hand," he remarked, as I mounted
up beside him.  "You see the slight smudge of blood upon the white
plaster.  What a lucky thing it is that we have had no very heavy
rain since yesterday!  The scent will lie upon the road in spite of
their eight-and-twenty hours' start."

I confess that I had my doubts myself when I reflected upon the great
traffic which had passed along the London road in the interval.  My
fears were soon appeased, however.  Toby never hesitated or swerved,
but waddled on in his peculiar rolling fashion.  Clearly, the pungent
smell of the creosote rose high above all other contending scents.

"Do not imagine," said Holmes, "that I depend for my success in this
case upon the mere chance of one of these fellows having put his foot
in the chemical.  I have knowledge now which would enable me to trace
them in many different ways.  This, however, is the readiest, and,
since fortune has put it into our hands, I should be culpable if I
neglected it.  It has, however, prevented the case from becoming the
pretty little intellectual problem which it at one time promised to
be.  There might have been some credit to be gained out of it but for
this too palpable clue."

"There is credit, and to spare," said I.  "I assure you, Holmes, that
I marvel at the means by which you obtain your results in this case,
even more than I did in the Jefferson Hope murder.  The thing seems
to me to be deeper and more inexplicable.  How, for example, could
you describe with such confidence the wooden-legged man?"

"Pshaw, my dear boy! it was simplicity itself.  I don't wish to be
theatrical.  It is all patent and above-board.  Two officers who are
in command of a convict-guard learn an important secret as to buried
treasure.  A map is drawn for them by an Englishman named Jonathan
Small.  You remember that we saw the name upon the chart in Captain
Morstan's possession.  He had signed it in behalf of himself and his
associates--the sign of the four, as he somewhat dramatically called
it.  Aided by this chart, the officers--or one of them--gets the
treasure and brings it to England, leaving, we will suppose, some
condition under which he received it unfulfilled.  Now, then, why did
not Jonathan Small get the treasure himself?  The answer is obvious.
The chart is dated at a time when Morstan was brought into close
association with convicts.  Jonathan Small did not get the treasure
because he and his associates were themselves convicts and could not
get away."

"But this is mere speculation," said I.

"It is more than that.  It is the only hypothesis which covers the
facts.  Let us see how it fits in with the sequel.  Major Sholto
remains at peace for some years, happy in the possession of his
treasure.  Then he receives a letter from India which gives him a
great fright.  What was that?"

"A letter to say that the men whom he had wronged had been set free."

"Or had escaped.  That is much more likely, for he would have known
what their term of imprisonment was.  It would not have been a
surprise to him.  What does he do then?  He guards himself against a
wooden-legged man--a white man, mark you, for he mistakes a white
tradesman for him, and actually fires a pistol at him.  Now, only one
white man's name is on the chart.  The others are Hindus or
Mohammedans.  There is no other white man.  Therefore we may say with
confidence that the wooden-legged man is identical with Jonathan
Small.  Does the reasoning strike you as being faulty?"

"No; it is clear and concise."

"Well, now, let us put ourselves in the place of Jonathan Small.  Let
us look at it from his point of view.  He comes to England with the
double idea of regaining what he would consider to be his rights and
of having his revenge upon the man who had wronged him.  He found out
where Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communications
with some one inside the house.  There is this butler, Lal Rao, whom
we have not seen.  Mrs. Bernstone gives him far from a good
character.  Small could not find out, however, where the treasure was
hid, for no one ever knew, save the major and one faithful servant
who had died.  Suddenly Small learns that the major is on his
death-bed.  In a frenzy lest the secret of the treasure die with him,
he runs the gauntlet of the guards, makes his way to the dying man's
window, and is only deterred from entering by the presence of his two
sons.  Mad with hate, however, against the dead man, he enters the
room that night, searches his private papers in the hope of
discovering some memorandum relating to the treasure, and finally
leaves a memento of his visit in the short inscription upon the card.
He had doubtless planned beforehand that should he slay the major he
would leave some such record upon the body as a sign that it was not
a common murder, but, from the point of view of the four associates,
something in the nature of an act of justice.  Whimsical and bizarre
conceits of this kind are common enough in the annals of crime, and
usually afford valuable indications as to the criminal.  Do you
follow all this?"

"Very clearly."

"Now, what could Jonathan Small do?  He could only continue to keep a
secret watch upon the efforts made to find the treasure.  Possibly he
leaves England and only comes back at intervals.  Then comes the
discovery of the garret, and he is instantly informed of it.  We
again trace the presence of some confederate in the household.
Jonathan, with his wooden leg, is utterly unable to reach the lofty
room of Bartholomew Sholto.  He takes with him, however, a rather
curious associate, who gets over this difficulty, but dips his naked
foot into creosote, whence come Toby, and a six-mile limp for a
half-pay officer with a damaged tendo Achillis."

"But it was the associate, and not Jonathan, who committed the crime."

"Quite so.  And rather to Jonathan's disgust, to judge by the way he
stamped about when he got into the room.  He bore no grudge against
Bartholomew Sholto, and would have preferred if he could have been
simply bound and gagged.  He did not wish to put his head in a
halter.  There was no help for it, however; the savage instincts of
his companion had broken out, and the poison had done its work; so
Jonathan Small left his record, lowered the treasure-box to the
ground, and followed it himself.  That was the train of events as far
as I can decipher them.  Of course as to his personal appearance he
must be middle-aged, and must be sunburned after serving his time in
such an oven as the Andamans.  His height is readily calculated from
the length of his stride, and we know that he was bearded.  His
hairiness was the one point which impressed itself upon Thaddeus
Sholto when he saw him at the window.  I don't know that there is
anything else."

"The associate?"

"Ah, well, there is no great mystery in that.  But you will know all
about it soon enough.  How sweet the morning air is!  See how that
one little cloud floats like a pink feather from some gigantic
flamingo.  Now the red rim of the sun pushes itself over the London
cloud-bank.  It shines on a good many folk, but on none, I dare bet,
who is on a stranger errand than you and I.  How small we feel with
our petty ambitions and strivings in the presence of the great
elemental forces of nature!  Are you well up in your Jean Paul?"

"Fairly so.  I worked back to him through Carlyle."

"That was like following the brook to the parent lake.  He makes one
curious but profound remark.  It is that the chief proof of a man's
real greatness lies in his perception of his own smallness.  It
argues, you see, a power of comparison and of appreciation, which is
in itself a proof of nobility.  There is much food for thought in
Richter.  You have not a pistol, have you?"

"I have my stick."

"It is just possible that we may need something of the sort if we get
to their lair.  Jonathan I shall leave to you, but if the other turns
nasty I shall shoot him dead."  He took out his revolver as he spoke,
and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the
right-hand pocket of his jacket.

We had during this time been following the guidance of Toby down the
half-rural, villa-lined roads which lead to the metropolis.  Now,
however, we were beginning to come among continuous streets, where
laborers and dockmen were already astir, and slatternly women were
taking down shutters and brushing doorsteps.  At the square-topped
corner public-house business was just beginning, and rough-looking
men were emerging, rubbing their sleeves across their beards after
their morning wet.  Strange dogs sauntered up, and stared wonderingly
at us as we passed, but our inimitable Toby looked neither to the
right nor to the left, but trotted onward with his nose to the ground
and an occasional eager whine, which spoke of a hot scent.

We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found
ourselves in Kennington Lane, having borne away through the side
streets to the east of the Oval.  The men whom we pursued seemed to
have taken a curiously zigzag road, with the idea probably of
escaping observation.  They had never kept to the main road if a
parallel side street would serve their turn.  At the foot of
Kennington Lane they had edged away to the left through Bond Street
and Miles Street.  Where the latter street turns into Knight's Place,
Toby ceased to advance, but began to run backward and forward with
one ear cocked and the other drooping, the very picture of canine
indecision.  Then he waddled round in circles, looking up to us from
time to time, as if to ask for sympathy in his embarrassment.

"What the deuce is the matter with the dog?" growled Holmes.  "They
surely would not take a cab, or go off in a balloon."

"Perhaps they stood here for some time," I suggested.

"Ah! it's all right.  He's off again," said my companion, in a tone
of relief.

He was indeed off; for, after sniffing round again, he suddenly made
up his mind, and darted away with an energy and determination such as
he had not yet shown.  The scent appeared to be much hotter than
before, for he had not even to put his nose on the ground, but tugged
at his leash, and tried to break into a run.  I could see by the
gleam in Holmes's eyes that he thought we were nearing the end of our
journey.

Our course now ran down Nine Elms until we came to Broderick and
Nelson's large timber-yard, just past the White Eagle tavern.  Here
the dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side gate
into the enclosure, where the sawyers were already at work.  On the
dog raced through sawdust and shavings, down an alley, round a
passage, between two wood-piles, and finally, with a triumphant yelp,
sprung upon a large barrel, which still stood upon the hand-trolley
on which it had been brought.  With lolling tongue and blinking eyes,
Toby stood upon the cask, looking from one to the other of us for
some sign of appreciation.  The staves of the barrel and the wheels
of the trolley were smeared with a dark liquid, and the whole air was
heavy with the smell of creosote.

Sherlock Holmes and I looked at each other, and then burst
simultaneously into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.



CHAPTER VIII

_The Baker Street Irregulars_

"What now?" I asked.  "Toby has lost his character for infallibility."

"He acted according to his lights," said Holmes, lifting him down
from the barrel and walking him out of the timber-yard.  "If you
consider how much creosote is carried about London in one day, it is
no great wonder that our trail should have been crossed.  It is much
used now, especially for the seasoning of wood.  Poor Toby is not to
blame."

"We must get on the main scent again, I suppose."

"Yes.  And, fortunately, we have no distance to go.  Evidently what
puzzled the dog at the corner of Knight's Place was that there were
two different trails running in opposite directions.  We took the
wrong one.  It only remains to follow the other."

There was no difficulty about this.  On leading Toby to the place
where he had committed his fault, he cast about in a wide circle, and
finally dashed off in a fresh direction.

"We must take care that he does not now bring us to the place where
the creosote barrel came from," I observed.

"I had thought of that.  But you notice that he keeps on the
pavement, whereas the barrel passed down the roadway.  No, we are on
the true scent now."

It tended down toward the river-side, running through Belmont Place
and Prince's Street.  At the end of Broad Street it ran right down to
the water's edge, where there was a small wooden wharf.  Toby led us
to the very edge of this, and there stood whining, looking out on the
dark current beyond.

"We are out of luck," said Holmes.  "They have taken to a boat here."
Several small punts and skiffs were lying about in the water on the
edge of the wharf.  We took Toby round to each in turn, but, though
he sniffed earnestly, he made no sign.

Close to the rude landing-stage was a small brick house, with a
wooden placard slung out through the second window.  "Mordecai Smith"
was printed across it in large letters, and, underneath, "Boats to
hire by the hour or day."  A second inscription above the door
informed us that a steam launch was kept--a statement which was
confirmed by a great pile of coke upon the jetty.  Sherlock Holmes
looked slowly around, and his face assumed an ominous expression.

"This looks bad," said he.  "These fellows are sharper than I
expected.  They seem to have covered their tracks.  There has, I
fear, been preconcerted management here."

He was approaching the door of the house, when it opened, and a
little, curly-headed lad of six came running out, followed by a
stoutish, red-faced woman, with a large sponge in her hand.

"You come back and be washed, Jack!" she shouted.  "Come back, you
young imp; for if your father comes home and finds you like that,
he'll let us hear of it!"

"Dear little chap!" said Holmes, strategically, "What a rosy-cheeked
young rascal!  Now, Jack, is there anything you would like?"

The youth pondered for a moment.  "I'd like a shillin'," said he.

"Nothing you would like better?"

"I'd like two shillin' better," the prodigy answered, after some
thought.

"Here you are, then!  Catch!  A fine child, Mrs. Smith."

"Lor' bless you, sir, he is that, and forward.  He gets a'most too
much for me to manage, 'specially when my man is away days at a time."

"Away, is he?" said Holmes, in a disappointed voice.  "I am sorry for
that, for I wanted to speak to Mr. Smith."

"He's been away since yesterday mornin', sir, and, truth to tell, I
am beginning to feel frightened about him.  But if it was about a
boat, sir, maybe I could serve as well."

"I wanted to hire his steam launch."

"Why, bless you, sir, it is in the steam launch that he has gone.
That's what puzzles me; for I know there ain't more coals in her than
would take her to about Woolwich and back.  If he'd been away in the
barge I'd ha' thought nothin'; for many a time a job has taken him as
far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin' there he might ha'
stayed over.  But what good is a steam launch without coals?"

"He might have bought some at a wharf down the river."

"He might, sir, but it weren't his way.  Many a time I've heard him
call out at the prices they charge for a few odd bags.  Besides, I
don't like that wooden-legged man, wi' his ugly face and outlandish
talk.  What did he want always knockin' about here for?"

"A wooden-legged man?" said Holmes, with bland surprise.

"Yes, sir; a brown, monkey-faced chap that's called more'n once for
my old man.  It was him that roused him up yesternight, and what's
more, my man knew he was comin', for he had steam up in the launch.
I tell you straight, sir, I don't feel easy in my mind about it."

"But, my dear Mrs. Smith," said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders, "you
are frightening yourself about nothing.  How could you possibly tell
that it was the wooden-legged man who came in the night?  I don't
quite understand how you can be so sure."

"His voice, sir.  I knew his voice, which is kind o' thick and foggy.
He tapped at the winder--about three it would be.  'Show a leg,
matey,' says he; 'time to turn out guard.'  My old man woke Jim
up--that's my eldest--and away they went, without so much as a word
to me.  I could hear the wooden leg clackin' on the stones."

"And was this wooden-legged man alone?"

"Couldn't say, I am sure, sir.  I didn't hear no one else."

"I am sorry, Mrs. Smith, for I wanted a steam launch, and I have
heard good reports of the--  Let me see, what is her name?"

"The 'Aurora,' sir."

"Ah!  She's not that old green launch with a yellow line, very broad
in the beam?"

"No, indeed.  She's as trim a little thing as any on the river.
She's been fresh painted, black with two red streaks."

"Thanks.  I hope that you will hear soon from Mr. Smith.  I am going
down the river; and if I should see anything of the 'Aurora' I shall
let him know that you are uneasy.  A black funnel, you say?"

"No, sir.  Black with a white band."

"Ah, of course.  It was the sides which were black.  Good morning,
Mrs. Smith.  There is a boatman here with a wherry, Watson.  We shall
take it and cross the river."

"The main thing with people of that sort," said Holmes, as we sat in
the sheets of the wherry, "is never to let them think that their
information can be of the slightest importance to you.  If you do,
they will instantly shut up like an oyster.  If you listen to them
under protest, as it were, you are very likely to get what you want."

"Our course now seems pretty clear," said I.

"What would you do then?"

"I would engage a launch and go down the track of the 'Aurora.'"

"My dear fellow, it would be a colossal task.  She may have touched
at any wharf on either side of the stream between here and Greenwich.
Below the bridge there is a perfect labyrinth of landing-places for
miles.  It would take you days and days to exhaust them, if you set
about it alone."

"Employ the police then."

"No.  I shall probably call Athelney Jones in at the last moment.  He
is not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would
injure him professionally.  But I have a fancy for working it out
myself, now that we have gone so far."

"Could we advertise, then, asking for information from wharfingers?"

"Worse and worse!  Our men would know that the chase was hot at their
heels, and they would be off out of the country.  As it is, they are
likely enough to leave, but as long as they think they are perfectly
safe they will be in no hurry.  Jones's energy will be of use to us
there, for his view of the case is sure to push itself into the daily
press, and the runaways will think that every one is off on the wrong
scent."

"What are we to do then?" I asked, as we landed near Millbank
Penitentiary.

"Take this hansom, drive home, have some breakfast, and get an hour's
sleep.  It is quite on the cards that we may be afoot to-night again.
Stop at a telegraph office, cabby.  We will keep Toby, for he may be
of use to us yet."

We pulled up at the Great Peter Street Post-office, and Holmes
despatched his wire.  "Whom do you think that is to?" he asked, as we
resumed our journey.

"I am sure I don't know."

"You remember the Baker Street division of the detective police force
whom I employed in the Jefferson Hope case?"

"Well," said I, laughing.

"This is just the case where they might be invaluable.  If they fail,
I have other resources; but I shall try them first.  That wire was to
my dirty little lieutenant, Wiggins, and I expect that he and his
gang will be with us before we have finished our breakfast."

It was between eight and nine o'clock now, and I was conscious of a
strong reaction after the successive excitements of the night.  I was
limp and weary, befogged in mind and fatigued in body.  I had not the
professional enthusiasm which carried my companion on, nor could I
look at the matter as a mere abstract intellectual problem.  As far
as the death of Bartholomew Sholto went, I had heard little good of
him, and could feel no intense antipathy to his murderer.  The
treasure, however, was a different matter.  That, or part of it,
belonged rightfully to Miss Morstan.  While there was a chance of
recovering it, I was ready to devote my life to the one object.
True, if I found it, it would probably put her forever beyond my
reach.  Yet it would be a petty and selfish love which would be
influenced by such a thought as that.  If Holmes could work to find
the criminals, I had a tenfold stronger reason to urge me on to find
the treasure.

A bath at Baker Street and a complete change freshened me up
wonderfully.  When I came down to our room I found the breakfast laid
and Holmes pouring out the coffee.

"Here it is," said he, laughing, and pointing to an open newspaper.
"The energetic Jones and the ubiquitous reporter have fixed it up
between them.  But you have had enough of the case.  Better have your
ham and eggs first."

I took the paper from him and read the short notice, which was headed
"Mysterious Business at Upper Norwood."

"About twelve o'clock last night," said the "Standard," "Mr.
Bartholomew Sholto, of Pondicherry Lodge, Upper Norwood, was found
dead in his room under circumstances which point to foul play.  As
far as we can learn, no traces of violence were found upon Mr.
Sholto's person, but a valuable collection of Indian gems, which the
deceased gentleman had inherited from his father, has been carried
off.  The discovery was first made by Mr. Sherlock Holmes and Dr.
Watson, who had called at the house with Mr. Thaddeus Sholto, brother
of the deceased.  By a singular piece of good fortune, Mr. Athelney
Jones, the well-known member of the detective police force, happened
to be at the Norwood Police Station, and was on the ground within
half an hour of the first alarm.  His trained and experienced
faculties were at once directed toward the detection of the
criminals, with the gratifying result that the brother, Thaddeus
Sholto, has already been arrested, together with the housekeeper,
Mrs. Bernstone, an Indian butler named Lal Rao, and a porter, or
gatekeeper, named McMurdo.  It is quite certain that the thief or
thieves were well acquainted with the house, for Mr. Jones's
well-known technical knowledge and his powers of minute observation
have enabled him to prove conclusively that the miscreants could not
have entered by the door or by the window, but must have made their
way across the roof of the building, and so through a trap-door into
a room which communicated with that in which the body was found.
This fact, which has been very clearly made out, proves conclusively
that it was no mere haphazard burglary.  The prompt and energetic
action of the officers of the law shows the great advantage of the
presence on such occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind.
We can not but think that it supplies an argument to those who would
wish to see our detectives more decentralized, and so brought into
closer and more effective touch with the cases which it is their duty
to investigate."

"Isn't it gorgeous!" said Holmes, grinning over his coffee-cup.
"What do you think of it?"

"I think that we have had a close shave ourselves of being arrested
for the crime."

"So do I.  I wouldn't answer for our safety now, if he should happen
to have another of his attacks of energy."

At this moment there was a loud ring at the bell, and I could hear
Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of
expostulation and dismay.

"By heaven, Holmes," I said, half-rising, "I believe they are really
after us."

"No, it's not quite so bad as that.  It is the unofficial force--the
Baker Street irregulars."

As he spoke, there came a swift pattering of naked feet upon the
stairs, a clatter of high voices, and in rushed a dozen dirty and
ragged little street Arabs.  There was some show of discipline among
them, despite their tumultuous entry, for they instantly drew up in
line and stood facing us with expectant faces.  One of their number,
taller and older than the others, stood forward with an air of
lounging superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable
little scarecrow.

"Got your message, sir," said he, "and brought 'em in sharp.  Three
bob and a tanner for tickets."

"Here you are," said Holmes, producing some silver, "In future they
can report to you, Wiggins, and you to me.  I can not have the house
invaded in this way.  However, it is just as well that you should all
hear the instructions.  I want to find the whereabout of a steam
launch called the 'Aurora,' owner, Mordecai Smith, black with two red
streaks, funnel black with a white band.  She is down the river
somewhere.  I want one boy to be at Mordecai Smith's landing-stage,
opposite Millbank, to say if the boat comes back.  You must divide it
out among yourselves, and do both banks thoroughly.  Let me know the
moment you have the news.  Is that all clear?"

"Yes, guv'nor," said Wiggins.

"The old scale of pay, and a guinea to the boy who finds the boat.
Here's a day in advance.  Now off you go!"  He handed them a shilling
each, and away they buzzed down the stairs, and I saw them a moment
later streaming down the street.

"If the launch is above water they will find her," said Holmes, as he
rose from the table and lighted his pipe.  "They can go everywhere,
see everything, overhear every one.  I expect to hear before evening
that they have spotted her.  In the meanwhile, we can do nothing but
await results.  We can not pick up the broken trail until we find
either the 'Aurora' or Mr. Mordecai Smith."

"Toby could eat these scraps, I dare say.  Are you going to bed,
Holmes?"

"No; I am not tired.  I have a curious constitution.  I never
remember feeling tired by work, though idleness exhausts me
completely.  I am going to smoke, and to think over this queer
business to which my fair client has introduced us.  If ever man had
an easy task, this of ours ought to be.  Wooden-legged men are not so
common, but the other man must, I should think, be absolutely unique."

"That other man again!"

"I have no wish to make a mystery of him--to you, anyway.  But you
must have formed your own opinion.  Now, do consider the data.
Diminutive foot-marks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet,
stone-headed wooden mace, great agility, small, poisoned darts.  What
do you make of all this?"

"A savage!" I exclaimed.  "Perhaps one of those Indians who were the
associates of Jonathan Small."

"Hardly that," said he.  "When first I saw signs of strange weapons I
was inclined to think so, but the remarkable character of the
foot-marks caused me to reconsider my views.  Some of the inhabitants
of the Indian Peninsula are small men, but none could have left such
marks as that.  The Hindoo proper has long and thin feet.  The
sandal-wearing Mohammedan has the great toe well separated from the
others, because the thong is commonly passed between.  These little
darts, too, could only be shot in one way.  They were from a
blow-pipe.  Now, then, where are we to find our savage?"

"South America," I hazarded.

He stretched his hand up, and took down a bulky volume from the
shelf.  "This is the first volume of a gazeteer which is now being
published.  It may be looked upon as the very latest authority.  What
have we here?  'Andaman Islands, situated three hundred and forty
miles to the north of Sumatra in the Bay of Bengal.'  Hum! hum!
What's all this?  'Moist climate, coral reefs, sharks, Port Blair,
convict-barracks, Rutland Island, cottonwoods--'  Ah, here we are.
'The aborigines of the Andaman Islands may perhaps claim the
distinction of being the smallest race upon this earth, though some
anthropologists prefer the Bushmen of Africa, the Digger Indians of
America, and the Terra del Fuegians.  The average height is rather
below four feet, although many full-grown adults may be found who are
very much smaller than this.  They are a fierce, morose, and
intractable people, though capable of forming most devoted
friendships when their confidence has once been gained.'  Mark that,
Watson.  Now, then, listen to this: 'They are naturally hideous,
having large misshapen heads, small fierce eyes, and distorted
features.  Their feet and hands, however, are remarkably small.  So
intractable and fierce are they that all the efforts of the British
officials have failed to win them over in any degree.  They have
always been a terror to shipwrecked crews, braining the survivors
with their stone-headed clubs, or shooting them with their poisoned
arrows.  These massacres are invariably concluded by a cannibal
feast.'  Nice, amiable people, Watson!  If this fellow had been left
to his own unaided devices this affair might have taken an even more
ghastly turn.  I fancy that, even as it is, Jonathan Small would give
a good deal not to have employed him."

"But how came he to have so singular a companion?"

"Ah, that is more than I can tell.  Since, however, we had already
determined that Small had come from the Andamans, it is not so very
wonderful that this islander should be with him.  No doubt we shall
know all about it in time.  Look here, Watson, you look regularly
done.  Lie down there on the sofa, and see if I can put you to sleep."

He took up his violin from the corner, and as I stretched myself out
he began to play some low, dreamy, melodious air--his own, no doubt,
for he had a remarkable gift for improvization.  I have a vague
remembrance of his gaunt limbs, his earnest face, and the rise and
fall of his bow.  Then I seemed to be floating peacefully away upon a
soft sea of sound, until I found myself in dreamland, with the sweet
face of Mary Morstan looking down upon me.



CHAPTER IX

_A Break in the Chain_

It was late in the afternoon before I awoke, strengthened and
refreshed.  Sherlock Holmes still sat exactly as I had left him, save
that he had laid aside his violin and was deep in a book.  He looked
across at me as I stirred, and I noticed that his face was dark and
troubled.

"You have slept soundly," he said.  "I feared that our talk would
wake you."

"I heard nothing," I answered.  "Have you had fresh news, then?"

"Unfortunately, no.  I confess that I am surprised and disappointed.
I expected something definite by this time.  Wiggins has just been up
to report.  He says that no trace can be found of the launch.  It is
a provoking check, for every hour is of importance."

"Can I do anything?  I am perfectly fresh now, and quite ready for
another night's outing."

"No; we can do nothing.  We can only wait.  If we go ourselves, the
message might come in our absence, and delay be caused.  You can do
what you will, but I must remain on guard."

"Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil
Forrester.  She asked me to yesterday."

"On Mrs. Cecil Forrester?" asked Holmes, with the twinkle of a smile
in his eyes.

"Well, of course, on Miss Morstan, too.  They were anxious to hear
what happened."

"I would not tell them too much," said Holmes.  "Women are never to
be entirely trusted--not the best of them."

I did not pause to argue over this atrocious sentiment.  "I shall be
back in an hour or two," I remarked.

"All right!  Good luck!  But, I say, if you are crossing the river
you may as well return Toby, for I don't think it at all likely that
we shall have any use for him now."

I took our mongrel accordingly, and left him, together with a half
sovereign, at the old naturalist's in Pinchin Lane.  At Camberwell I
found Miss Morstan a little weary after her night's adventures, but
very eager to hear the news.  Mrs. Forrester, too, was full of
curiosity.  I told them all that we had done, suppressing, however,
the more dreadful parts of the tragedy.  Thus, although I spoke of
Mr. Sholto's death, I said nothing of the exact manner and method of
it.  With all my omissions, however, there was enough to startle and
amaze them.

"It is a romance!" cried Mrs. Forrester.  "An injured lady, half a
million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
They take the place of the conventional dragon or wicked earl."

"And two knights errant to the rescue," added Miss Morstan, with a
bright glance at me.

"Why, Mary, your fortune depends upon the issue of this search.  I
don't think that you are nearly excited enough.  Just imagine what it
must be to be so rich and to have the world at your feet."

It sent a thrill of joy to my heart to notice that she showed no sign
of elation at the prospect.  On the contrary, she gave a toss of her
proud head, as though the matter were one in which she took small
interest.

"It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said.
"Nothing else is of any consequence; but I think that he has behaved
most kindly and honorably throughout.  It is our duty to clear him of
this dreadful and unfounded charge."

It was evening before I left Camberwell, and quite dark by the time I
reached home.  My companion's book and pipe lay by his chair, but he
had disappeared.  I looked about in the hope of seeing a note, but
there was none.

"I suppose that Mr. Sherlock Holmes has gone out," I said to Mrs.
Hudson, as she came up to lower the blinds.

"No, sir.  He has gone to his room, sir.  Do you know, sir," sinking
her voice into an impressive whisper, "I am afraid for his health!"

"Why so, Mrs. Hudson?"

"Well, he's that strange, sir.  After you was gone he walked, and he
walked, up and down, and up and down, until I was weary of the sound
of his footstep.  Then I heard him talking to himself, and muttering,
and every time the bell rang out he came on the stairhead, with,
'What is that, Mrs. Hudson?'  And now he has slammed off to his room,
but I can hear him walking away the same as ever.  I hope he's not
going to be ill, sir.  I ventured to say something to him about
cooling medicine, but he turned on me, sir, with such a look that I
don't know how I ever got out of the room."

"I don't think that you have any cause to be uneasy, Mrs. Hudson," I
answered.  "I have seen him like this before.  He has some small
matter upon his mind which makes him restless."  I tried to speak
lightly to our worthy landlady, but I was myself somewhat uneasy when
through the long night I still, from time to time, heard the dull
sound of his tread, and knew how his keen spirit was chafing against
this involuntary inaction.

At breakfast-time he looked worn and haggard, with a little fleck of
feverish color upon either cheek.

"You are knocking yourself up, old man," I remarked.  "I heard you
marching about in the night."

"No, I could not sleep," he answered.  "This infernal problem is
consuming me.  It is too much to be balked by so petty an obstacle,
when all else had been overcome.  I know the men, the launch,
everything; and yet I can get no news.  I have set other agencies at
work, and used every means at my disposal.  The whole river has been
searched on either side, but there is no news, nor has Mrs. Smith
heard of her husband.  I shall come to the conclusion soon that they
have scuttled the craft.  But there are objections to that."

"Or that Mrs. Smith has put us on a wrong scent."

"No, I think that may be dismissed.  I had inquiries made, and there
is a launch of that description."

"Could it have gone up the river?"

"I have considered that possibility, too, and there is a search party
who will work up as far as Richmond.  If no news comes to-day, I
shall start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the
boat.  But surely, surely, we shall hear something."

We did not, however.  Not a word came to us, either from Wiggins or
from the other agencies.  There were articles in most of the papers
upon the Norwood tragedy.  They all appeared to be rather hostile to
the unfortunate Thaddeus Sholto.  No fresh details were to be found,
however, in any of them, save that an inquest was to be held upon the
following day.  I walked over to Camberwell in the evening to report
our ill success to the ladies, and on my return I found Holmes
dejected and somewhat morose.  He would hardly reply to my questions,
and busied himself all evening in an abstruse chemical analysis which
involved much heating of retorts and distilling of vapors, ending at
last in a smell which fairly drove me out of the apartment.  Up to
the small hours of the morning I could hear the clinking of his
test-tubes, which told me that he was still engaged in his malodorous
experiment.

In the early dawn I woke with a start, and was surprised to find him
standing by my bedside, clad in a rude sailor dress, with a
pea-jacket, and a coarse red scarf round his neck.

"I am off down the river, Watson," said he.  "I have been turning it
over in my mind, and I can see only one way out of it.  It is worth
trying, at all events."

"Surely I can come with you, then?" said I.

"No; you can be much more useful if you will remain here as my
representative.  I am loth to go, for it is quite on the cards that
some message may come during the day, though Wiggins was despondent
about it last night.  I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and
act on your own judgment if any news should come.  Can I rely upon
you?"

"Most certainly."

"I am afraid that you will not be able to wire to me, for I can
hardly tell yet where I may find myself.  If I am in luck, however, I
may not be gone so very long.  I shall have news of some sort or
other before I get back."

I heard nothing of him by breakfast-time.  On opening the "Standard,"
however, I found that there was a fresh allusion to the business.
"With reference to the Upper Norwood tragedy," it remarked, "we have
reason to believe that the matter promises to be even more complex
and mysterious than was originally supposed.  Fresh evidence has
shown that it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have
been in any way concerned in the matter.  He and the housekeeper,
Mrs. Bernstone, were both released yesterday evening.  It is
believed, however, that the police have a clue to the real culprits,
and that it is being prosecuted by Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland
Yard, with all his well-known energy and sagacity.  Further arrests
may be expected at any moment."

"That is satisfactory so far as it goes," thought I.  "Friend Sholto
is safe, at any rate.  I wonder what the fresh clue may be; though it
seems to be a stereotyped form whenever the police have made a
blunder."

I tossed the paper down upon the table, but at that moment my eye
caught an advertisement in the agony column.  It ran in this way:


"Lost.--Whereas, Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son Jim, left
Smith's Wharf at or about three o'clock last Tuesday morning, in the
steam launch 'Aurora,' black with two red stripes; funnel black with
a white band; the sum of five pounds will be paid to any one who can
give information to Mrs. Smith, at Smith's Wharf, or at 222B Baker
Street, as to the whereabouts of the said Mordecai Smith and the
launch 'Aurora.'"


This was clearly Holmes's doing.  The Baker Street address was enough
to prove that.  It struck me as rather ingenious, because it might be
read by the fugitives without their seeing in it more than the
natural anxiety of a wife for her missing husband.

It was a long day.  Every time that a knock came to the door, or a
sharp step passed in the street, I imagined that it was either Holmes
returning or an answer to his advertisement.  I tried to read, but my
thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the
ill-assorted and villainous pair whom we were pursuing.  Could there
be, I wondered, some radical flaw in my companion's reasoning?  Might
he be suffering from some huge self-deception?  Was it not possible
that his nimble and speculative mind had built up this wild theory
upon faulty premises?  I had never known him to be wrong; and yet the
keenest reasoner may occasionally be deceived.  He was likely, I
thought, to fall into error through the overrefinement of his
logic--his preference for a subtle and bizarre explanation when a
plainer and more commonplace one lay ready to his hand.  Yet, on the
other hand, I had myself seen the evidence, and I had heard the
reasons for his deductions.  When I looked back on the long chain of
curious circumstances, many of them trivial in themselves, but all
tending in the same direction, I could not disguise from myself that
even if Holmes's explanation were incorrect the true theory must be
equally outr√© and startling.

At three o'clock in the afternoon there was a loud peal at the bell,
an authoritative voice in the hall, and, to my surprise, no less a
person than Mr. Athelney Jones was shown up to me.  Very different
was he, however, from the brusque and masterful professor of
common-sense who had taken over the case so confidently at Upper
Norwood.  His expression was downcast, and his bearing meek and even
apologetic.

"Good-day, sir; good-day," said he.  "Mr. Sherlock Holmes is out, I
understand."

"Yes; and I can not be sure when he will be back.  But perhaps you
would care to wait.  Take that chair and try one of these cigars."

"Thank you; I don't mind if I do," said he, mopping his face with a
red bandana handkerchief.

"And a whisky and soda?"

"Well, half a glass.  It is very hot for the time of year and I have
a good deal to worry and try me.  You know my theory about this
Norwood case?"

"I remember that you expressed one."

"Well, I have been obliged to reconsider it.  I had my net drawn
tightly round Mr. Sholto, sir, when pop! he went through a hole in
the middle of it.  He was able to prove an alibi which could not be
shaken.  From the time that he left his brother's room he was never
out of sight of some one or other.  So it could not be he who climbed
over the roofs and through trap-doors.  It's a very dark case and my
professional credit is at stake.  I should be very glad of a little
assistance."

"We all need help sometimes," said I.

"Your friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, is a wonderful man, sir," said he,
in a husky and confidential voice.  "He's a man who is not to be
beat.  I have known that young man go into a good many cases, but I
never saw the case yet that he could not throw light upon.  He is
irregular in his methods, and a little quick, perhaps, in jumping at
theories, but, on the whole, I think he would have made a most
promising officer, and I don't care who knows it.  I have had a wire
from him this morning, by which I understand that he has got some
clue to this Sholto business.  Here is his message."

He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me.  It was
dated from Poplar at twelve o'clock.  "Go to Baker Street at once,"
it said.  "If I have not returned, wait for me.  I am close on the
track of the Sholto gang.  You can come with us to-night if you want
to be in at the finish."

"This sounds well.  He has evidently picked up the scent again," said
I.

"Ah, then he has been at fault, too," exclaimed Jones, with evident
satisfaction.  "Even the best of us are thrown off sometimes.  Of
course this may prove to be a false alarm; but it is my duty as an
officer of the law to allow no chance to slip.  But there is some one
at the door.  Perhaps this is he."

A heavy step was heard ascending the stairs, with a great wheezing
and rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath.  Once
or twice he stopped, as though the climb were too much for him, but
at last he made his way to our door and entered.  His appearance
corresponded to the sounds which we had heard.  He was an aged man,
clad in seafaring garb, with an old pea-jacket buttoned up to his
throat.  His back was bowed, his knees were shaky, and his breathing
was painfully asthmatic.  As he leaned upon a thick oaken cudgel his
shoulders heaved in the effort to draw the air into his lungs.  He
had a colored scarf round his chin, and I could see little of his
face save a pair of keen dark eyes, overhung by bushy white brows,
and long gray side-whiskers.  Altogether he gave me the impression of
a respectable master mariner who had fallen into years and poverty.

"What is it, my man?" I asked.

He looked about him in the slow, methodical fashion of old age.

"Is Mr. Sherlock Holmes here?" said he.

"No; but I am acting for him.  You can tell me any message you have
for him."

"It was to him himself I was to tell it," said he.

"But I tell you that I am acting for him.  Was it about Mordecai
Smith's boat?"

"Yes.  I knows well where it is.  An' I knows where the men he is
after are.  An' I knows where the treasure is.  I knows all about it."

"Then tell me, and I shall let him know."

"It was to him I was to tell it," he repeated, with the petulant
obstinacy of a very old man.

"Well, you must wait for him."

"No, no; I ain't goin' to lose a whole day to please no one.  If Mr.
Holmes ain't here, then Mr. Holmes must find it all out for himself.
I don't care about the look of either of you, and I won't tell a
word."

He shuffled toward the door, but Athelney Jones got in front of him.

"Wait a bit, my friend," said he.  "You have important information,
and you must not walk off.  We shall keep you, whether you like it or
not, until our friend returns."

The old man made a little run toward the door, but, as Athelney Jones
put his broad back up against it, he recognized the uselessness of
resistance.

"Pretty sort o' treatment this!" he cried, stamping his stick.  "I
come here to see a gentleman, and you two, who I never saw in my
life, seize me and treat me in this fashion!"

"You will be none the worse," I said.  "We shall recompense you for
the loss of your time.  Sit over here on the sofa, and you will not
have long to wait."

He came across sullenly enough, and seated himself with his face
resting on his hands.  Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
Suddenly, however, Holmes's voice broke in upon us.

"I think that you might offer me a cigar, too," he said.

We both started in our chairs.  There was Holmes sitting close to us
with an air of quiet amusement.

"Holmes!" I exclaimed.  "You here?  But where is the old man?"

"Here is the old man," said he, holding out a heap of white hair.
"Here he is--wig, whiskers, eyebrows, and all.  I thought my disguise
was pretty good, but I hardly expected that it would stand that test."

"Ah, you rogue!" cried Jones, highly delighted.  "You would have made
an actor, and a rare one.  You had the proper workhouse cough, and
those weak legs of yours are worth ten pounds a week.  I thought I
knew the glint of your eye, though.  You didn't get away from us so
easily, you see."

"I have been working in that get-up all day," said he, lighting his
cigar.  "You see, a good many of the criminal classes begin to know
me--especially since our friend here took to publishing some of my
cases; so I can only go on the warpath under some simple disguise
like this.  You got my wire?"

"Yes; that was what brought me here."

"How has your case prospered?"

"It has all come to nothing.  I had to release two of my prisoners,
and there is no evidence against the other two."

"Never mind.  We shall give you two others in place of them.  But you
must put yourself under my orders.  You are welcome to all the
official credit, but you must act on the lines that I point out.  Is
that agreed?"

"Entirely, if you will help me to the men."

"Well, then, in the first place I shall want a fast police-boat--a
steam launch--to be at the Westminster Stairs at seven o'clock."

"That is easily managed.  There is always one about there; but I can
step across the road and telephone, to make sure."

"Then I shall want two stanch men, in case of resistance."

"There will be two or three in the boat.  What else?"

"When we secure the men we shall get the treasure.  I think that it
would be a pleasure to my friend here to take the box round to the
young lady to whom half of it rightfully belongs.  Let her be the
first to open it.  Eh, Watson?"

"It would be a great pleasure to me."

"Rather an irregular proceeding," said Jones, shaking his head.
"However, the whole thing is irregular, and I suppose we must wink at
it.  The treasure must afterward be handed over to the authorities
until after the official investigation."

"Certainly.  That is easily managed.  One other point.  I should much
like to have the details about this matter from the lips of Jonathan
Small himself.  You know I like to work the detail of my cases out.
There is no objection to my having an unofficial interview with him,
either here in my rooms or elsewhere, as long as he is efficiently
guarded?"

"Well, you are master of the situation.  I have had no proof yet of
the existence of this Jonathan Small.  However, if you can catch him
I don't see how I can refuse you an interview with him."

"That is understood, then?"

"Perfectly.  Is there anything else?"

"Only that I insist upon your dining with us.  It will be ready in
half an hour.  I have oysters and a brace of grouse, with something a
little choice in white wine.  Watson, you have never yet recognized
my merits as a housekeeper."



CHAPTER X

_The End of the Islander_

Our meal was a merry one.  Holmes could talk exceedingly well when he
chose, and that night he did choose.  He appeared to be in a state of
nervous exaltation.  I have never known him so brilliant.  He spoke
on a quick succession of subjects--on miracle-plays, on medieval
pottery, on Stradivarius violins, on the Buddhism of Ceylon, and on
the warships of the future--handling each as though he had made a
special study of it.  His bright humor marked the reaction from his
black depression of the preceding days.  Athelney Jones proved to be
a sociable soul in his hours of relaxation, and faced his dinner with
the air of a _bon vivant_.  For myself, I felt elated at the thought
that we were nearing the end of our task, and I caught something of
Holmes's gaiety.  None of us alluded during the dinner to the cause
which had brought us together.

When the cloth was cleared, Holmes glanced at his watch, and filled
up three glasses with port.  "One bumper," said he, "to the success
of our little expedition.  And now it is high time we were off.  Have
you a pistol, Watson?"

"I have my old service-revolver in my desk."

"You had best take it, then.  It is well to be prepared.  I see that
the cab is at the door.  I ordered it for half-past six."

It was a little past seven before we reached the Westminster wharf,
and found our launch awaiting us.  Holmes eyed it critically.

"Is there anything to mark it as a police-boat?"

"Yes--that green lamp at the side."

"Then take it off."

The small change was made; we stepped on board, and the ropes were
cast off.  Jones, Holmes, and I sat in the stern.  There was one man
at the rudder, one to tend the engines, and two burly
police-inspectors forward.

"Where to?" asked Jones.

"To the Tower.  Tell them to stop opposite to Jacobson's Yard."

Our craft was evidently a very fast one.  We shot past the long lines
of loaded barges as though they were stationary.  Holmes smiled with
satisfaction as we overhauled a river steamer and left her behind us.

"We ought to be able to catch anything on the river," he said.

"Well, hardly that.  But there are not many launches to beat us."

"We shall have to catch the 'Aurora,' and she has a name for being a
clipper.  I will tell you how the land lies, Watson.  You recollect
how annoyed I was at being balked by so small a thing?"

"Yes."

"Well, I gave my mind a thorough rest by plunging into a chemical
analysis.  One of our greatest statesmen has said that a change of
work is the best rest.  So it is.  When I had succeeded in dissolving
the hydrocarbon which I was at work at, I came back to our problem of
the Sholtos, and thought the whole matter out again.  My boys had
been up the river and down the river without result.  The launch was
not at any landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned.  Yet it could
hardly have been scuttled to hide their traces--though that always
remained as a possible hypothesis if all else failed.  I knew that
this man Small had a certain degree of low cunning, but I did not
think him capable of anything in the nature of delicate finesse.
That is usually a product of higher education.  I then reflected that
since he had certainly been in London some time--as we had evidence
that he maintained a continual watch over Pondicherry Lodge--he could
hardly leave at a moment's notice, but would need some little time,
if it were only a day, to arrange his affairs.  That was the balance
of probability, at any rate."

"It seemed to me to be a little weak," said I.  "It is more probable
that he had arranged his affairs before ever he set out upon his
expedition."

"No, I hardly think so.  This lair of his would be too valuable a
retreat in case of need for him to give it up until he was sure that
he could do without it.  But a second consideration struck me:
Jonathan Small must have felt that the peculiar appearance of his
companion, however much he may have top-coated him, would give rise
to gossip, and possibly be associated with this Norwood tragedy.  He
was quite sharp enough to see that.  They had started from their
headquarters under cover of darkness, and he would wish to get back
before it was broad light.  Now it was past three o'clock, according
to Mrs. Smith, when they got the boat.  It would be quite bright, and
people would be about in an hour or so.  Therefore, I argued, they
did not go very far.  They paid Smith well to hold his tongue,
reserved his launch for the final escape, and hurried to their
lodgings with the treasure-box.  In a couple of nights, when they had
time to see what view the papers took, and whether there was any
suspicion, they would make their way under the cover of darkness to
some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs, where no doubt they had
already arranged for passages to America or the Colonies."

"But the launch?  They could not have taken that to their lodgings.'"

"Quite so.  I argued that the launch must be no great way off, in
spite of its invisibility.  I then put myself in the place of Small,
and looked at it as a man of his capacity would.  He would probably
consider that to send back the launch or to keep it at a wharf would
make pursuit easy if the police did happen to get on his track.  How,
then, could he conceal the launch and yet have her at hand when
wanted?  I wondered what I should do myself if I were in his shoes.
I could only think of one way of doing it.  I might hand the launch
over to some boat-builder or repairer, with the directions to make a
trifling change in her.  She would then be removed to his shed or
yard, and so be effectually concealed, while at the same time I could
have her at a few hours' notice."

"That seems simple enough."

"It is just these very simple things which are extremely liable to be
overlooked.  However, I determined to act on the idea.  I started at
once in this harmless seaman's rig and inquired at all the yards down
the river.  I drew blank at fifteen, but at the
sixteenth--Jacobson's--I learned that the 'Aurora' had been handed
over to them two days ago by a wooden-legged man, with some trivial
directions as to her rudder.  'There ain't naught amiss with her
rudder,' said the foreman.  'There she lies, with the red streaks.'
At that moment who should come down but Mordecai Smith, the missing
owner.  He was rather the worse for liquor.  I should not, of course,
have known him, but he bellowed out his name and the name of his
launch.  'I want her to-night at eight o'clock,' said he--'eight
o'clock sharp, mind, for I have two gentlemen who won't be kept
waiting.'  They had evidently paid him well, for he was very flush of
money, chucking shillings about to the men.  I followed him some
distance, but he subsided into an alehouse; so I went back into the
yard, and, happening to pick up one of my boys on the way, I
stationed him as a sentry over the launch.  He is to stand at the
water's edge and wave his handkerchief to us when they start.  We
shall be lying off in the stream, and it will be a strange thing if
we do not take men, treasure, and all."

"You have planned it all very neatly, whether they are the right men
or not," said Jones; "but if the affair were in my hands, I should
have had a body of police in Jacobson's Yard, and arrested them when
they came down."

"Which would have been never.  This man Small is a pretty shrewd
fellow.  He would send a scout on ahead, and if anything made him
suspicious, he would lie snug for another week."

"But you might have stuck to Mordecai Smith, and so been led to their
hiding-place," said I.

"In that case I should have wasted my day.  I think that it is a
hundred to one against Smith knowing where they live.  As long as he
has liquor and good pay, why should he ask questions?  They send him
messages what to do.  No, I thought over every possible course, and
this is the best."

While this conversation had been proceeding, we had been shooting the
long series of bridges which span the Thames.  As we passed the city
the last rays of the sun were gilding the cross upon the summit of
St. Paul's.  It was twilight before we reached the Tower.

"That is Jacobson's Yard," said Holmes, pointing to a bristle of
masts and rigging on the Surrey side.  "Cruise gently up and down
here under cover of this string of lighters."  He took a pair of
night-glasses from his pocket and gazed some time at the shore.  "I
see my sentry at his post," he remarked, "but no sign of a
handkerchief."

"Suppose we go down-stream a short way and lie in wait for them,"
said Jones, eagerly.  We were all eager by this time, even the
policeman and stokers, who had a very vague idea of what was going
forward.

"We have no right to take anything for granted," Holmes answered.
"It is certainly ten to one that they go downstream, but we can not
be certain.  From this point we can see the entrance to the yard, and
they can hardly see us.  It will be a clear night and plenty of
light.  We must stay where we are.  See how the folk swarm over
yonder in the gas-light."

"They are coming from work in the yard."

"Dirty-looking rascals, but I suppose every one has some little
immortal spark concealed about him.  You would not think it, to look
at them.  There is no _a priori_ probability about it.  A strange
enigma is man!"

"Some one calls him a soul concealed in an animal," I suggested.

"Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes.  "He remarks
that, while the individual man is an insoluble puzzle, in the
aggregate he becomes a mathematical certainty.  You can, for example,
never foretell what any one man will do, but you can say with
precision what an average number will be up to.  Individuals vary,
but percentages remain constant.  So says the statistician.  But do I
see a handkerchief?  Surely there is a white flutter over yonder."

"Yes; it is your boy," I cried.  "I can see him plainly."

"And there is the 'Aurora,'" exclaimed Holmes, "and going like the
devil!  Full speed ahead, engineer.  Make after that launch with the
yellow light.  By heaven, I shall never forgive myself if she proves
to have the heels of us!"

She had slipped unseen through the yard entrance, and passed behind
two or three small craft, so that she had fairly got her speed up
before we saw her.  Now she was flying down the stream, near in to
the shore, going at a tremendous rate.  Jones looked gravely at her
and shook his head.

"She is very fast," he said.  "I doubt if we shall catch her."

"We _must_ catch her!" cried Holmes, between his teeth.  "Heap it on,
stokers!  Make her do all she can!  If we burn the boat we must have
them!"

We were fairly after her now.  The furnaces roared, and the powerful
engines whizzed and clanked like a great metallic heart.  Her sharp,
steep prow cut through the still river water, and sent two rolling
waves to right and to left of us.  With every throb of the engines
she sprung and quivered like a living thing.  One great yellow
lantern in our bows threw a long, flickering funnel of light in front
of us.  Right ahead a dark blur upon the water showed where the
"Aurora" lay, and the swirl of white foam behind her spoke of the
pace at which she was going.  We flashed past barges, steamers,
merchant vessels, in and out, behind this one and round the other.
Voices hailed us out of the darkness, but still the "Aurora"
thundered on, and still we followed close upon her track.

"Pile it on, men; pile it on!" cried Holmes, looking down into the
engine-room, while the fierce glow from below beat upon his eager,
aquiline face.  "Get every pound of steam you can."

"I think we gain a little," said Jones, with his eyes on the "Aurora."

"I am sure of it," said I.  "We shall be up with her in a very few
minutes."

At that moment, however, as our evil fate would have it, a tug with
three barges in tow blundered in between us.  It was only by putting
our helm hard down that we avoided a collision, and before we could
round them and recover our way the "Aurora" had gained a good two
hundred yards.  She was still, however, well in view, and the murky,
uncertain twilight was settling into a clear starlit night.  Our
boilers were strained to their utmost, and the frail shell vibrated
and creaked with the fierce energy which was driving us along.  We
had shot through the Pool, past the West India Docks, down the long
Deptford Reach, and up again after rounding the Isle of Dogs.  The
dull blur in front of us resolved itself now clearly enough into the
dainty "Aurora."  Jones turned our search-light upon her, so that we
could plainly see the figures upon her deck.  One man sat by the
stern, with something black between his knees, over which he stooped.
Beside him lay a dark mass which looked like a Newfoundland dog.  The
boy held the tiller, while against the red glare of the furnace I
could see old Smith, stripped to the waist, and shoveling coal for
dear life.  They may have had some doubt at first as to whether we
were really pursuing them, but now, as we followed every winding and
turning which they took, there could no longer be any question about
it.  At Greenwich we were about three hundred paces behind them.  At
Blackwall we could not have been more than two hundred and fifty.  I
have coursed many creatures in many countries during my checkered
career, but never did sport give me such a wild thrill as this mad,
flying man-hunt down the Thames.  Steadily we drew in upon them yard
by yard.  In the silence of the night we could hear the panting and
clanking of their machinery.  The man in the stern still crouched
upon the deck, and his arms were moving as though he were busy, while
every now and then he would look up and measure with a glance the
distance which still separated us.  Nearer we came and nearer.  Jones
yelled to them to stop.  We were not more than four boats' lengths
behind them, both boats flying at a tremendous pace.  It was a clear
reach of the river, with Barking Level upon one side and the
melancholy Plumstead Marshes upon the other.  At our hail the man in
the stern sprung up from the deck and shook his two clinched fists at
us, cursing the while in a high, cracked voice.  He was a good-sized,
powerful man, and, as he stood poising himself with legs astride, I
could see that from the thigh downward there was but a wooden stump
upon the right side.  At the sound of his strident, angry cries there
was a movement in the huddled bundle upon the deck.  It straightened
itself into a little black man--the smallest I have ever seen--with a
great, misshapen head and a shock of tangled, disheveled hair.
Holmes had already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the
sight of this savage, distorted creature.  He was wrapped in some
sort of dark ulster or blanket, which left only his face exposed; but
that face was enough to give a man a sleepless night.  Never have I
seen features so deeply marked with all bestiality and cruelty.  His
small eyes glowed and burned with a sombre light, and his thick lips
were writhed back from his teeth, which grinned and chattered at us
with a half-animal fury.

"Fire if he raises his hand," said Holmes, quietly.  We were within a
boat's-length by this time, and almost within touch of our quarry.  I
can see the two of them now as they stood, the white man with his
legs far apart, shrieking out curses, and the unhallowed dwarf, with
his hideous face, and his strong, yellow teeth gnashing at us in the
light of our lantern.

It was well that we had so clear a view of him.  Even as we looked he
plucked out from under his covering a short, round piece of wood,
like a school-ruler, and clapped it to his lips.  Our pistols rang
out together.  He whirled round, threw up his arms, and with a kind
of choking cough fell sideways into the stream.  I caught one glimpse
of his venomous, menacing eyes amid the white swirl of the waters.
At the same moment the wooden-legged man threw himself upon the
rudder and put it hard down, so that his boat made straight in for
the southern bank, while we shot past her stern, only clearing her by
a few feet.  We were round after her in an instant, but she was
already nearly at the bank.  It was a wild and desolate place, where
the moon glimmered upon a wide expanse of marsh-land with pools of
stagnant water and beds of decaying vegetation.  The launch with a
dull thud ran up upon the mud-bank, with her bow in the air and her
stern flush with the water.  The fugitive sprung out, but his stump
instantly sunk its whole length into the sodden soil.  In vain he
struggled and writhed.  Not one step could he possibly take either
forward or backward.  He yelled in impotent rage, and kicked
frantically into the mud with his other foot, but his struggles only
bored his wooden pin the deeper into the sticky bank.  When we
brought our launch alongside he was so firmly anchored that it was
only by throwing the end of a rope over his shoulders that we were
able to haul him out, and to drag him, like some evil fish, over our
side.  The two Smiths, father and son, sat sullenly in their launch,
but came aboard meekly enough when commanded.  The "Aurora" herself
we hauled off and made fast to our stern.  A solid iron chest of
Indian workmanship stood upon the deck.  This, there could be no
question, was the same that had contained the ill-omened treasure of
the Sholtos.  There was no key, but it was of considerable weight, so
we transferred it carefully to our own little cabin.  As we steamed
slowly up-stream again, we flashed our searchlight in every
direction, but there was no sign of the islander.  Somewhere in the
dark ooze at the bottom of the Thames lie the bones of that strange
visitor to our shores.

"See here," said Holmes, pointing to the wooden hatchway.  "We were
hardly quick enough, with our pistols."  There, sure enough, just
behind where we had been standing, stuck one of those murderous darts
which we knew so well.  It must have whizzed between us at the
instant that we fired.  Holmes smiled at it, and shrugged his
shoulders in his easy fashion, but I confess that it turned me sick
to think of the horrible death which had passed so close to us that
night.



CHAPTER XI

_The Great Agra Treasure_

Our captive sat in the cabin opposite the iron box which he had done
so much and waited so long to gain.  He was a sunburned,
reckless-eyed fellow, with a network of lines and wrinkles all over
his mahogany features, which told of a hard, open-air life.  There
was a singular prominence about his bearded chin which marked a man
who was not to be easily turned from his purpose.  His age may have
been fifty or thereabout, for his black, curly hair was thickly shot
with gray.  His face, in repose, was not an unpleasing one, though
his heavy brows and aggressive chin gave him, as I had lately seen, a
terrible expression when moved to anger.  He sat now with his
handcuffed hands upon his lap, and his head sunk upon his breast,
while he looked with his keen, twinkling eyes at the box which had
been the cause of his ill-doings.  It seemed to me that there was
more sorrow than anger in his rigid and contained countenance.  Once
he looked up at me with a gleam of something like humor in his eyes.

"Well, Jonathan Small," said Holmes, lighting a cigar, "I am sorry
that it has come to this."

"And so am I, sir," he answered, frankly.  "I don't believe that I
can swing over the job.  I give you my word on the Book that I never
raised hand against Mr. Sholto.  It was that little hell-hound,
Tonga, who shot one of his cursed darts into him.  I had no part in
it, sir.  I was as grieved as if it had been my blood relation.  I
welted the little devil with the slack end of the rope for it, but it
was done, and I could not undo it again."

"Have a cigar," said Holmes; "and you had better take a pull out of
my flask, for you are very wet.  How could you expect so small and
weak a man as this black fellow to overpower Mr. Sholto and hold him
while you were climbing the rope?"

"You seem to know as much about it as if you were there, sir.  The
truth is that I hoped to find the room clear.  I knew the habits of
the house pretty well, and it was the time when Mr. Sholto usually
went down to his supper.  I shall make no secret of the business.
The best defense that I can make is just the simple truth.  Now, if
it had been the old major, I would have swung for him with a light
heart.  I would have thought no more of knifing him than of smoking
this cigar.  But it's cursed hard that I should be lagged over this
young Sholto, with whom I had no quarrel whatever."

"You are under the charge of Mr. Athelney Jones, of Scotland Yard.
He is going to bring you up to my rooms, and I shall ask you for a
true account of the matter.  You must make a clean breast of it, for
if you do I hope that I may be of use to you.  I think I can prove
that the poison acts so quickly that the man was dead before you ever
reached the room."

"That he was, sir!  I never got such a turn in my life as when I saw
him grinning at me with his head on his shoulder as I climbed through
the window.  It fairly shook me, sir.  I'd have half-killed Tonga for
it, if he had not scrambled off.  That was how he came to leave his
club, and some of his darts, too, as he tells me, which, I dare say,
helped to put you on our track; though how you kept on it is more
than I can tell.  I don't feel no malice against you for it.  But it
does seem a queer thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I, who
have a fair claim to nigh upon half a million of money, should spend
the first half of my life building a breakwater in the Andamans, and
am likely to spend the other half digging drains at Dartmoor.  It was
an evil day for me when first I clapped eyes upon the merchant
Achmet, and had to do with the Agra treasure, which never brought
anything but a curse yet upon the man who owned it.  To him it
brought murder; to Major Sholto it brought fear and guilt; to me it
has meant slavery for life."

At this moment Athelney Jones thrust his broad face and heavy
shoulders into the tiny cabin.  "Quite a family party," he remarked.
"I think I shall have a pull at that flask, Holmes.  Well, I think we
may all congratulate each other.  Pity we didn't take the other
alive; but there was no choice.  I say, Holmes, you must confess that
you cut it rather fine.  It was all we could do to overhaul her."

"All is well that ends well," said Holmes.  "But I certainly did not
know that the 'Aurora' was such a clipper."

"Smith says she is one of the fastest launches on the river, and that
if he had had another man to help him with the engines we should
never have caught her.  He swears he knew nothing of this Norwood
business."

"Neither he did," cried our prisoner; "not a word.  I chose his
launch, because I heard that she was a flyer.  We told him nothing,
but we paid him well, and he was to get something handsome if we
reached our vessel, the 'Esmeralda,' at Gravesend, outward bound for
the Brazils."

"Well, if he has done no wrong, we shall see that no wrong comes to
him.  If we are pretty quick in catching our men, we are not so quick
in condemning them."  It was amusing to notice how the consequential
Jones was already beginning to give himself airs on the strength of
the capture.  From the slight smile which played over Sherlock
Holmes's face, I could see that the speech had not been lost upon him.

"We will be at Vauxhall Bridge presently," said Jones, "and shall
land you, Doctor Watson, with the treasure-box.  I need hardly tell
you that I am taking a very grave responsibility upon myself in doing
this.  It is most irregular; but, of course, an agreement is an
agreement.  I must, however, as a matter of duty, send an inspector
with you, since you have so valuable a charge.  You will drive, no
doubt?"

"Yes, I shall drive."

"It is a pity there is no key, that we may make an inventory first.
You will have to break it open.  Where is the key, my man?"

"At the bottom of the river," said Small, shortly.

"Hum!  There was no use your giving this unnecessary trouble.  We
have had work enough already through you.  However, doctor, I need
not warn you to be careful.  Bring the box back with you to the Baker
Street rooms.  You will find us there, on our way to the station."

They landed me at Vauxhall, with my heavy iron box, and with a bluff,
genial inspector as my companion.  A quarter of an hour's drive
brought us to Mrs. Cecil Forrester's.  The servant seemed surprised
at so late a visitor.  Mrs. Cecil Forrester was out for the evening,
she explained, and likely to be very late.  Miss Morstan, however,
was in the drawing-room; so to the drawing-room I went, box in hand,
leaving the obliging inspector in the cab.

She was seated by the open window, dressed in some sort of white,
diaphanous material, with a little touch of scarlet in the neck and
waist.  The soft light of a shaded lamp fell upon her as she leaned
back in the basket-chair, playing over her sweet, grave face, and
tinting with a dull, metallic sparkle the rich coils of her luxuriant
hair; one white arm and hand drooped over the side of the chair, and
her whole pose and figure spoke of an absorbing melancholy.  At the
sound of my footfall she sprang to her feet, however, and a bright
flush of surprise and of pleasure colored her pale cheeks.

"I heard a cab drive up," she said.  "I thought that Mrs. Forrester
had come back very early, but I never dreamt that it might be you.
What news have you brought me?"

"I have brought something better than news," said I, putting down the
box upon the table, and speaking jovially and boisterously, though my
heart was heavy within me.  "I have brought you something which is
worth all the news in the world.  I have brought you a fortune."

She glanced at the iron box.  "Is that the treasure, then?" she
asked, coolly enough.

"Yes, this is the great Agra treasure.  Half of it is yours and half
is Thaddeus Sholto's.  You will have a couple of hundred thousand
each.  Think of that!  An annuity of ten thousand pounds.  There will
be few richer young ladies in England.  Is it not glorious?"

I think that I must have been rather overacting my delight, and that
she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her
eyebrows rise a little, and she glanced at me curiously.

"If I have it," said she, "I owe it to you."

"No, no," I answered; "not to me, but to my friend Sherlock Holmes.
With all the will in the world, I could never have followed up a clue
which has taxed even his analytical genius.  As it was, we very
nearly lost it at the last moment."

"Pray sit down and tell me all about it, Doctor Watson," said she.

I narrated briefly what had occurred since I had seen her
last--Holmes's new method of search, the discovery of the "Aurora,"
the appearance of Athelney Jones, our expedition in the evening, and
the wild chase down the Thames.  She listened, with parted lips and
shining eyes, to my recital of our adventures.  When I spoke of the
dart which had so narrowly missed us, she turned so white that I
feared she was about to faint.

"It is nothing," she said, as I hastened to pour her out some water.
"I am all right again.  It was a shock to me to hear that I had
placed my friends in such horrible peril."

"That is all over," I answered.  "It was nothing.  I will tell you no
more gloomy details.  Let us turn to something brighter.  There is
the treasure.  What could be brighter than that?  I got leave to
bring it with me, thinking that it would interest you to be the first
to see it."

"It would be of the greatest interest to me," she said.  There was no
eagerness in her voice, however.  It struck her, doubtless, that it
might seem ungracious upon her part to be indifferent to a prize
which had cost so much to win.

"What a pretty box!" she said, stooping over it.  "This is Indian
work, I suppose?"

"Yes; it is Benares metal-work."

"And so heavy!" she exclaimed, trying to raise it.  "The box alone
must be of some value.  Where is the key?"

"Small threw it into the Thames," I answered.  "I must borrow Mrs.
Forrester's poker."  There was, in the front, a thick and broad hasp,
wrought in the image of a sitting Buddha.  Under this I thrust the
end of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever.  The hasp sprang
open with a loud snap.  With trembling fingers I flung back the lid.
We both stood gazing in astonishment.  The box was empty!

No wonder that it was heavy.  The iron-work was two-thirds of an inch
thick all round.  It was massive, well made, and solid, like a chest
constructed to carry things of great price, but not one shred or
crumb of metal or jewelry lay within it.  It was absolutely and
completely empty.

"The treasure is lost," said Miss Morstan, calmly.

As I listened to the words and realized what they meant, a great
shadow seemed to pass from my soul.  I did not know how this Agra
treasure had weighed me down until now that it was finally removed.
It was selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realize
nothing save that the golden barrier was gone from between us.

"Thank God!" I ejaculated from my very heart.

She looked at me with a quick, questioning smile.  "Why do you say
that?" she asked.

"Because you are within my reach again," I said, taking her hand.
She did not withdraw it.  "Because I love you, Mary, as truly as ever
a man loved a woman.  Because this treasure, these riches, sealed my
lips.  Now that they are gone, I can tell you how I love you.  That
is why I said, 'Thank God.'"

"Then I say, 'Thank God,' too," she whispered, as I drew her to my
side.  Whoever had lost a treasure, I knew that night that I had
gained one.



CHAPTER XII

_The Strange Story of Jonathan Small_

A very patient man was the inspector in the cab, for it was a weary
time before I rejoined him.  His face clouded over when I showed him
the empty box.

"There goes the reward!" said he, gloomily.  "Where there is no money
there is no pay.  This night's work would have been worth a tenner
each to Sam Brown and me, if the treasure had been there."

"Mr. Thaddeus Sholto is a rich man," I said.  "He will see that you
are rewarded, treasure or no treasure."

The inspector shook his head despondently, however.  "It's a bad
job," he repeated; "and so Mr. Athelney Jones will think."

His forecast proved to be correct, for the detective looked blank
enough when I got to Baker Street and showed him the empty box.  They
had only just arrived, Holmes, the prisoner, and he, for they had
changed their plans so far as to report themselves at a station upon
the way.  My companion lounged in his armchair with his usual
listless expression, while Small sat stolidly opposite to him with
his wooden leg cocked over his sound one.  As I exhibited the empty
box he leaned back in his chair and laughed aloud.

"This is your doing, Small," said Athelney Jones, angrily.

"Yes, I have put it away where you shall never lay hand upon it," he
cried, exultantly.  "It is my treasure; and if I can't have the loot
I'll take darned good care that no one else does.  I tell you that no
living man has any right to it, unless it is three men who are in the
Andaman convict-barracks and myself.  I know now that I can not have
the use of it, and I know that they can not.  I have acted all
through for them as much as for myself.  It's been the sign of four
with us always.  Well I know that they would have had me do just what
I have done, and throw the treasure into the Thames rather than let
it go to kith or kin of Sholto or of Morstan.  It was not to make
them rich that we did for Achmet.  You'll find the treasure where the
key is, and where little Tonga is.  When I saw that your launch must
catch us, I put the loot in a safe place.  There are no rupees for
you this journey."

"You are deceiving us, Small," said Athelney Jones, sternly.  "If you
had wished to throw the treasure into the Thames, it would have been
easier for you to have thrown box and all."

"Easier for me to throw, and easier for you to recover," he answered,
with a shrewd, sidelong look.  "The man that was clever enough to
hunt me down is clever enough to pick an iron box from the bottom of
a river.  Now that they are scattered over five miles or so, it may
be a harder job.  It went to my heart to do it, though.  I was
half-mad when you came up with us.  However, there's no good grieving
over it.  I've had ups in my life, and I've had downs, but I've
learned not to cry over spilled milk."

"This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective.  "If you
had helped justice, instead of thwarting it in this way, you would
have had a better chance at your trial."

"Justice?" snarled the ex-convict.  "A pretty justice!  Whose loot is
this, if it is not ours?  Where is the justice that I should give it
up to those who had never earned it?  Look how I have earned it.
Twenty long years in that fever-ridden swamp, all day at work under
the mangrove tree, all night chained up in the filthy convict huts,
bitten by mosquitoes, racked with ague, bullied by every cursed
black-faced policeman who loved to take it out of a white man.  That
was how I earned the Agra treasure; and you talk to me of justice
because I can not bear to feel that I have paid this price only that
another may enjoy it!  I would rather swing a score of times, or have
one of Tonga's darts in my hide, than live in a convict's cell and
feel that another man is at his ease in a palace with the money that
should be mine!"  Small had dropped his mask of stoicism, and all
this came out in a wild whirl of words, while his eyes blazed, and
the handcuffs clanked together with the impassioned movement of his
hands.  I could understand, as I saw the fury and the passion of the
man, that it was no groundless or unnatural terror which had
possessed Major Sholto when he first learned that the injured convict
was upon his track.

"You forget that we know nothing of all this," said Holmes, quietly.
"We have not heard your story, and we can not tell how far justice
may originally have been on your side."

"Well, sir, you have been very fair-spoken to me, though I can see
that I have you to thank that I have these bracelets upon my wrists.
Still, I bear no grudge for that.  It is all fair and above-board.
If you want to hear my story, I have no wish to hold it back.  What I
say to you is God's truth, every word of it.  Thank you; you can put
the glass beside me here, and I'll put my lips to it if I am dry.

"I am a Worcestershire man myself--born near Pershore.  I dare say
you would find a heap of Smalls living there now if you were to look.
I have often thought of taking a look round there, but the truth is
that I was never much of a credit to the family, and I doubt if they
would be so very glad to see me.  They were all steady, chapel-going
folk, small farmers, well known and respected over the country-side,
while I was always a bit of a rover.  At last, however, when I was
about eighteen, I gave them no more trouble, for I got into a mess
over a girl, and could only get out of it by taking the queen's
shilling and joining the Third Buffs, which was just starting for
India.

"I wasn't destined to do much soldiering, however.  I had just got
past the goose-step, and learned to handle my musket, when I was fool
enough to go swimming in the Ganges.  Luckily for me, my company
sergeant, John Holder, was in the water at the same time, and he was
one of the finest swimmers in the service.  A crocodile took me, just
as I was half-way across, and nipped off my right leg, as clean as a
surgeon could have done it, just above the knee.  What with the shock
and loss of blood, I fainted, and should have been drowned if Holder
had not caught hold of me and paddled for the bank.  I was five
months in hospital over it, and when at last I was able to limp out
of it, with this timber toe strapped to my stump, I found myself
invalided out of the army and unfitted for any active occupation.

"I was, as you can imagine, pretty down on my luck at this time, for
I was a useless cripple, though not yet in my twentieth year.
However, my misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise.  A
man named Abelwhite, who had come out there as an indigo-planter,
wanted an overseer to look after his coolies and keep them up to
their work.  He happened to be a friend of our colonel's, who had
taken an interest in me since the accident.  To make a long story
short, the colonel recommended me strongly for the post, and, as the
work was mostly to be done on horseback, my leg was no great
obstacle, for I had enough knee left to keep a good grip on the
saddle.  What I had to do was to ride over the plantation, to keep an
eye on the men as they worked, and to report the idlers.  The pay was
fair, I had comfortable quarters, and altogether I was content to
spend the remainder of my life in indigo-planting.  Mr. Abelwhite was
a kind man, and he would often drop into my little shanty and smoke a
pipe with me, for white folk out there feel their hearts warm to each
other as they never do here at home.

"Well, I was never in luck's way long.  Suddenly, without a note of
warning, the great mutiny broke upon us.  One month India lay as
still and peaceful, to all appearance, as Surrey or Kent; the next
there were two hundred thousand black devils let loose, and the
country was a perfect hell.  Of course, you know all about it,
gentlemen, a deal more than I do, very like, since reading is not in
my line.  I only know what I saw with my own eyes.  Our plantation
was at a place called Muttra, near the border of the Northwest
Provinces.  Night after night the whole sky was alight with the
burning bungalows, and day after day we had small companies of
Europeans passing through our estate, with their wives and children,
on their way to Agra, where were the nearest troops.  Mr. Abelwhite
was an obstinate man.  He had it in his head that the affair had been
exaggerated, and that it would blow over as suddenly as it had sprung
up.  There he sat on his veranda, drinking whisky-pegs and smoking
cheroots, while the country was in a blaze about him.  Of course we
stuck by him, I and Dawson, who, with his wife, used to do the
bookwork and the managing.  Well, one fine day the crash came.  I had
been away on a distant plantation, and was riding slowly home in the
evening, when my eye fell upon something all huddled together at the
bottom of a steep nullah.  I rode down to see what it was, and the
cold struck through my heart when I found it was Dawson's wife, all
cut into ribbons, and half-eaten by jackals and native dogs.  A
little further up the road Dawson himself was lying on his face,
quite dead, with an empty revolver in his hand, and four Sepoys lying
across one another in front of him.  I reined up my horse, wondering
which way I should turn, but at that moment I saw thick smoke curling
up from Abelwhite's bungalow and the flames beginning to burst
through the roof.  I knew then that I could do my employer no good,
but would only throw my own life away if I meddled in the matter.
From where I stood I could see hundreds of the black fiends, with
their red coats still on their backs, dancing and howling round the
burning house.  Some of them pointed at me, and a couple of bullets
sung past my head; so I broke away across the paddy-fields, and found
myself late at night safe within the walls at Agra.

"As it proved, however, there was no great safety there, either.  The
whole country was up like a swarm of bees.  Wherever the English
could collect in little bands they held just the ground that their
guns commanded.  Everywhere else they were helpless fugitives.  It
was a fight of the millions against the hundreds; and the crudest
part of it was that these men that we fought against, foot, horse,
and gunners, were our own picked troops, whom we had taught and
trained, handling our own weapons, and blowing our own bugle-calls.
At Agra there were the Third Bengal Fusiliers, some Sikhs, two troops
of horse, and a battery of artillery.  A volunteer corps of clerks
and merchants had been formed, and this I joined, wooden leg and all.
We went out to meet the rebels at Shahgunge early in July, and we
beat them back for a time, but our powder gave out, and we had to
fall back upon the city.  Nothing but the worst news came to us from
every side--which is not to be wondered at, for if you look at the
map you will see that we were right in the heart of it.  Lucknow is
rather better than a hundred miles to the east, and Cawnpore about as
far to the south.  From every point on the compass there was nothing
but torture, and murder, and outrage.

"The city of Agra is a great place, swarming with fanatics and fierce
devil-worshipers of all sorts.  Our handful of men were lost among
the narrow, winding streets.  Our leader moved across the river,
therefore, and took up his position in the old fort of Agra.  I don't
know if any of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of that
old fort.  It is a very queer place--the queerest that ever I was in,
and I have been in some rum corners, too.  First of all, it is
enormous in size.  I should think that the enclosure must be acres
and acres.  There is a modern part, which took all our garrison,
women, children, stores, and everything else, with plenty of room
over.  But the modern part is nothing like the size of the old
quarter, where nobody goes, and which is given over to the scorpions
and the centipeds.  It is all full of great, deserted halls, and
winding passages, and long corridors twisting in and out, so that it
is easy enough for folks to get lost in it.  For this reason it was
seldom that any one went into it, though now and again a party with
torches might go exploring.

"The river washes along the front of the old fort, and so protects
it, but on the sides and behind there are many doors, and these had
to be guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that which
was actually held by our troops.  We were short-handed, with hardly
men enough to man the angles of the building and to serve the guns.
It was impossible for us, therefore, to station a strong guard at
every one of the innumerable gates.  What we did was to organize a
central guard-house in the middle of the fort, and to leave each gate
under the charge of one white man and two or three natives.  I was
selected to take charge during certain hours of the night of a small,
isolated door upon the south-west side of the building.  Two Sikh
troopers were placed under my command, and I was instructed if
anything went wrong to fire my musket, when I might rely upon help
coming at once from the central guard.  As the guard was a good two
hundred paces away, however, and as the space between was cut up into
a labyrinth of passages and corridors, I had great doubts as to
whether they could arrive in time to be of any use in case of an
actual attack.

"Well, I was pretty proud at having this small command given me,
since I was a raw recruit, and a game-legged one at that.  For two
nights I kept the watch with my Punjaubees.  They were tall,
fierce-looking chaps, Mohammed Singh and Abdullah Khan by name, both
old fighting-men who had borne arms against us at Chillianwalla.
They could talk English pretty well, but I could get little out of
them.  They preferred to stand together and jabber all night in their
queer Sikh lingo.  For myself, I used to stand outside the gateway,
looking down on the broad, winding river and on the twinkling lights
of the great city.  The beating of drums, the rattle of tomtoms, and
the yells and howls of the rebels, drunk with opium and with bhang,
were enough to remind us all night of our dangerous neighbors across
the stream.  Every two hours the officers of the night used to come
round to all the posts, to make sure that all was well.

"The third night of my watch was dark and dirty, with a small,
driving rain.  It was dreary work standing in the gateway hour after
hour in such weather.  I tried again and again to make my Sikhs talk,
but without much success.  At two in the morning the rounds passed,
and broke for a moment the weariness of the night.  Finding that my
companions would not be led into conversation, I took out my pipe,
and laid down my musket to strike a match.  In an instant the two
Sikhs were upon me.  One of them snatched my firelock up and leveled
it at my head, while the other held a great knife to my throat, and
swore between his teeth that he would plunge it into me if I moved a
step.

"My first thought was that these fellows were in league with the
rebels, and that this was the beginning of an assault.  If our door
were in the hands of the Sepoys the place must fall, and the women
and children be treated as they were in Cawnpore.  Maybe you
gentlemen think that I am just making out a case for myself, but I
give you my word that when I thought of that, though I felt the point
of the knee at my throat, I opened my mouth with the intention of
giving a scream, if it was my last one, which might alarm the main
guard.  The man who held me seemed to know my thoughts; for, even as
I braced myself to it, he whispered: 'Don't make a noise.  The fort
is safe enough.  There are no rebel dogs on this side of the river.'
There was the ring Of truth in what he said, and I knew that if I
raised my voice I was a dead man.  I could read it in the fellow's
brown eyes.  I waited, therefore, in silence, to see what it was they
wanted from me.

"'Listen to me, sahib,' said the taller and fiercer of the pair, the
one whom they called Abdullah Khan.  'You must either be with us now
or you must be silenced forever.  The thing is too great a one for us
to hesitate.  Either you are heart and soul with us, on your oath on
the cross of the Christians, or your body this night shall be thrown
into the ditch, and we shall pass over to our brothers in the rebel
army.  There is no middle way.  Which is it to be, death or life?  We
can only give you three minutes to decide, for the time is passing,
and all must be done before the rounds come again.'

"'How can I decide?' said I.  'You have not told me what you want of
me.  But I tell you now, that if it is anything against the safety of
the fort, I will have no truck with it; so you can drive home your
knife, and welcome.'

"'It is nothing against the fort,' said he.  'We only ask you to do
that which your countrymen come to this land for.  We ask you to be
rich.  If you will be one of us this night, we will swear to you upon
the naked knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was ever
known to break, that you shall have your fair share of the loot.  A
quarter of the treasure shall be yours.  We can say no fairer.'

"'But what is the treasure, then?' I asked.  'I am as ready to be
rich as you can be, if you will but show me how it can be done.'

"'You swear, then,' said he, 'by the bones of your father, by the
honor of your mother, by the cross of your faith, to raise no hand
and speak no word against us, either now or afterward?'

"'I will swear it;' I answered, 'provided that the fort is not
endangered.'

"Then my comrades and I will swear that you shall have a quarter of
the treasure, which shall be equally divided among the four of us.'

"There are but three,' said I.

"'No; Dost Akbar must have his share.  We can tell the tale to you
while we await them.  Do you stand at the gate, Mohammed Singh, and
give notice of their coming.  The thing stands thus, sahib, and I
tell it to you because I know that an oath is binding upon a
Feringhee, and that we may trust you.  Had you been a lying Hindu,
though you had sworn by all the gods in their false temples, your
blood would have been upon the knife and your body in the water.  But
the Sikh knows the Englishman, and the Englishman knows the Sikh.
Hearken, then, to what I have to say.

"'There is a rajah in the Northern Provinces who has much wealth,
though his lands are small.  Much has come to him from his father,
and more still he has set by himself, for he is of a low nature and
hoards his gold rather than spends it.  When the troubles broke out
he would be friends both with the lion and the tiger--with the Sepoy
and with the Company's Raj.  Soon, however, it seemed to him that the
white men's day was come, for through all the land he could hear of
nothing but of their death and their overthrow.  Yet, being a careful
man, he made such plans that, come what might, half at least of his
treasure should be left to him.  That which was in gold and silver he
kept by him in the vaults of his palace, but the most precious stones
and the choicest pearls that he had he put in an iron box, and sent
it by a trusty servant who, under the guise of a merchant, should
take it to the fort at Agra, there to lie until the land is at peace.
Thus, if the rebels won he would have his money, but if the Company
conquered, his jewels would be saved to him.  Having thus divided his
hoard, he threw himself into the cause of the Sepoys, since they were
strong upon his borders.  By his doing this, mark you, sahib, his
property becomes the due of those who have been true to their salt.

"'This pretended merchant, who travels under the name of Achmet, is
now in the city of Agra, and desires to gain his way into the fort.
He has with him, as traveling companion, my foster-brother, Dost
Akbar, who knows his secret.  Dost Akbar has promised this night to
lead him to a side-postern of the fort, and has chosen this one for
his purpose.  Here he will come presently, and here he will find
Mohammed Singh and myself awaiting him.  The place is lonely, and
none shall know of his coming.  The world shall know of the merchant
Achmet no more, but the great treasure of the rajah shall be divided
among us.  What say you to it, sahib?'"

"In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred
thing; but it is very different when there is fire and blood all
round you and you have been used to meeting death at every turn.
Whether Achmet the merchant lived or died was a thing as light as air
to me, but at the talk about the treasure my heart turned to it, and
I thought of what I might do in the old country with it, and how my
folk would stare when they saw their ne'er-do-weel coming back with
his pockets full of gold moidores.  I had, therefore, already made up
my mind.  Abdullah Khan, however, thinking that I hesitated, pressed
the matter more closely.

"'Consider, sahib,' said he, 'that if this man is taken by the
commandant he will be hanged or shot, and his jewels taken by the
Government, so that no man will be a rupee the better for them.  Now,
since we do the taking of him, why should we not do the rest as well?
The jewels will be as well with us as in the Company's coffers.
There will be enough to make every one of us rich men and great
chiefs.  No one can know about the matter, for here we are cut off
from all men.  What could be better for the purpose?  Say again,
then, sahib, whether you are with us, or if we must look upon you as
an enemy.'

"'I am with you heart and soul,' said I.

"'It is well,' he answered, handing me back my firelock.  'You see
that we trust you, for your word, like ours, is not to be broken.  We
have now only to wait for my brother and the merchant.'

"'Does your brother know, then, of what you will do?' I asked.

"'The plan is his.  He has devised it.  We will go to the gate and
share the watch with Mohammed Singh.'

"The rain was still falling steadily, for it was just the beginning
of the wet season.  Brown, heavy clouds were drifting across the sky,
and it was hard to see more than a stone-cast.  A deep moat lay in
front of our door, but the water was in places nearly dried up, and
it could easily be crossed.  It was strange to me to be standing
there with those two wild Punjaubees waiting for the man who was
coming to his death.

"Suddenly my eye caught the glint of a shaded lantern at the other
side of the moat.  It vanished among the mound-heaps, and then
appeared again coming slowly in our direction.

"'Here they are!' I exclaimed.

"'You will challenge him, sahib, as usual,' whispered Abdullah.
'Give him no cause for fear.  Send us in with him, and we shall do
the rest while you stay here on guard.  Have the lantern ready to
uncover, that we may be sure that it is indeed the man.'

"The light had flickered onward, now stopping and now advancing,
until I could see two dark figures upon the other side of the moat.
I let them scramble down the sloping bank, splash through the mire,
and climb half-way up to the gate, before I challenged them.

"'Who goes there?' said I, in a subdued voice.

"'Friends,' came the answer.  I uncovered my lantern and threw a
flood of light upon them.  The first was an enormous Sikh, with a
black beard which swept nearly down to his cummerbund.  Outside of a
show I have never seen so tall a man.  The other was a little, fat,
round fellow, with a great yellow turban, and a bundle in his hand,
done up in a shawl.  He seemed to be all in a quiver with fear, for
his hands twitched as if he had the ague, and his head kept turning
to left and right with two bright little twinkling eyes, like a mouse
when he ventures out from his hole.  It gave me the chills to think
of killing him, but I thought of the treasure, and my heart set as
hard as a flint within me.  When he saw my white face he gave a
little chirrup of joy and came running up toward me.

"'Your protection, sahib,' he panted; 'your protection for the
unhappy merchant Achmet.  I have traveled across Rajpootana that I
might seek the shelter of the fort at Agra.  I have been robbed, and
beaten, and abused because I have been the friend of the Company.  It
is a blessed night this when I am once more in safety--I and my poor
possessions.'

"'What have you in the bundle?' I asked.

"'An iron box,' he answered, 'which contains one or two little family
matters which are of no value to others, but which I should be sorry
to lose.  Yet I am not a beggar; and I shall reward you, young sahib,
and your governor also, if he will give me the shelter I ask.'

"I could not trust myself to speak longer with the man.  The more I
looked at his fat, frightened face, the harder did it seem that we
should slay him in cold blood.  It was best to get it over.

"'Take him to the main guard,' said I.  The two Sikhs closed in upon
him on each side, and the giant walked behind, while they marched in
through the dark gateway.  Never was a man so compassed round with
death.  I remained at the gateway with the lantern.

"I could hear the measured tramp of their footsteps sounding through
the lonely corridors.  Suddenly it ceased, and I heard voices, and a
scuffle, with the sound of blows.  A moment later there came, to my
horror, a rush of footsteps coming in my direction, with the loud
breathing of a running man.  I turned my lantern down the long,
straight passage, and there was the fat man, running like the wind,
with a smear of blood across his face, and close at his heels,
bounding like a tiger, the great, black-bearded Sikh, with a knife
flashing in his hand.  I have never seen a man run so fast as that
little merchant.  He was gaining on the Sikh, and I could see that if
he once passed me and got to the open air, he would save himself yet.
My heart softened to him, but again the thought of his treasure
turned me hard and bitter.  I cast my fire-lock between his legs as
he raced past, and he rolled twice over like a shot rabbit.  Ere he
could stagger to his feet the Sikh was upon him, and buried his knife
twice in his side.  The man never uttered moan nor moved muscle, but
lay where he had fallen.  I think, myself, that he may have broken
his neck with the fall.  You see, gentlemen, that I am keeping my
promise.  I am telling you every word of this business just exactly
as it happened, whether it is in my favor or not."

He stopped, and held out his manacled hands for the whisky and water
which Holmes had brewed for him.  For myself, I confess that I had
now conceived the utmost horror of the man, not only for this
cold-blooded business in which he had been concerned, but even more
for the somewhat flippant and careless way in which he narrated it.
Whatever punishment was in store for him, I felt that he might expect
no sympathy from me.  Sherlock Holmes and Jones sat with their hands
upon their knees, deeply interested in the story, but with the same
disgust written upon their faces.  He may have observed it, for there
was a touch of defiance in his voice and manner as he proceeded:

"It was all very bad, no doubt," said he.  "I should like to know how
many fellows in my shoes would have refused a share of this loot when
they knew that they would have their throats cut for their pains.
Besides, it was my life or his when once he was in the fort.  If he
had got out, the whole business would have come to light, and I
should have been court-martialed and shot as likely as not; for
people were not very lenient at a time like that."

"Go on with your story," said Holmes, shortly.

"Well, we carried him in, Abdullah, Akbar, and I.  A fine weight he
was, too, for all that he was so short.  Mohammed Singh was left to
guard the door.  We took him to a place which the Sikhs had already
prepared.  It was some distance off, where a winding passage leads to
a great empty hall, the brick walls of which were all crumbling to
pieces.  The earth floor had sunk in at one place, making a natural
grave, so we left Achmet the merchant there, having first covered him
over with loose bricks.  This done, we all went back to the treasure.

"It lay where he had dropped it when he was first attacked.  The box
was the same which now lies open upon your table.  A key was hung by
a silken cord to that carved handle upon the top.  We opened it, and
the light of the lantern gleamed upon a collection of gems such as I
have read of and thought about when I was a little lad at Pershore.
It was blinding to look upon them.  When we had feasted our eyes we
took them all out and made a list of them.  There were one hundred
and forty-three diamonds of the first water, including one which has
been called, I believe, 'the Great Mogul,' and is said to be the
second largest stone in existence.  Then there were ninety-seven very
fine emeralds, and one hundred and seventy rubies, some of which,
however, were small.  There were forty carbuncles, two hundred and
ten sapphires, sixty-one agates, and a great quantity of beryls,
onyxes, cat's-eyes, turquoises, and other stones, the very names of
which I did not know at the time, though I have become more familiar
with them since.  Besides this, there were nearly three hundred very
fine pearls, twelve of which were set in a gold chaplet.  By the way,
these last had been taken out of the chest and were not there when I
recovered it.

"After we had counted our treasures we put them back into the chest
and carried them to the gateway to show them to Mohammed Singh.  Then
we solemnly renewed our oath to stand by each other and be true to
our secret.  We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until the
country should be at peace again, and then to divide it equally among
ourselves.  There was no use dividing it at present, for if gems of
such value were found upon us it would cause suspicion, and there was
no privacy in the fort nor any place where we could keep them.  We
carried the box, therefore, into the same hall where we had buried
the body, and there, under certain bricks, in the best preserved
wall, we made a hollow and put our treasure.  We made careful note of
the place, and next day I drew four plans, one for each of us, and
put the sign of the four of us at the bottom, for we had sworn that
we should each always act for all, so that none might take advantage.
That is an oath that I can put my hand to my heart and swear that I
have never broken.

"Well, there is no use my telling you, gentlemen, what came of the
Indian mutiny.  After Wilson took Delhi, and Sir Colin relieved
Lucknow, the back of the business was broken.  Fresh troops came
pouring in, and Nana Sahib made himself scarce over the frontier.  A
flying column under Colonel Greathead came round to Agra and cleared
the Pandies away from it.  Peace seemed to be settling upon the
country, and we four were beginning to hope that the time was at hand
when we might safely go off with our shares of the plunder.  In a
moment, however, our hopes were shattered, by our being arrested as
the murderers of Achmet.

"It came about in this way.  When the rajah put his jewels into the
hands of Achmet, he did it because he knew that he was a trusty man.
They are suspicious folk in the East, however; so what does this
rajah do but take a second even more trusty servant, and set him to
play the spy upon the first.  This second man was ordered never to
let Achmet out of his sight, and he followed him like his shadow.  He
went after him that night, and saw him pass through the doorway.  Of
course he thought he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for
admission there himself next day, but could find no trace of Achmet.
This seemed to him so strange that he spoke about it to a sergeant of
guides, who brought it to the ears of the commandant.  A thorough
search was quickly made, and the body was discovered.  Thus at the
very moment that we thought that all was safe, we were all four
seized and brought to trial on a charge of murder--three of us
because we had held the gate that night, and the fourth because he
was known to have been in the company of the murdered man.  Not a
word about the jewels came out at the trial, for the rajah had been
deposed and driven out of India; so no one had any particular
interest in them.  The murder, however, was clearly made out, and it
was certain that we must all have been concerned in it.  The three
Sikhs got penal servitude for life, and I was condemned to death,
though my sentence was afterward commuted into the same as the others.

"It was rather a queer position that we found ourselves in then.
There we were all four tied by the leg, and with precious little
chance of ever getting out again, while we each held a secret which
might have put each of us in a palace if we could only have made use
of it.  It was enough to make a man eat his heart out to have to
stand the kick and the cuff of every petty jack-in-office, to have
rice to eat and water to drink, when that gorgeous fortune was ready
for him outside, just waiting to be picked up.  It might have driven
me mad; but I was always a pretty stubborn one, so I just held on and
bided my time.

"At last it seemed to me to have come.  I was changed from Agra to
Madras, and from there to Blair Island, in the Andamans.  There are
very few white convicts at this settlement, and, as I had behaved
well from the first, I soon found myself a privileged person.  I was
given a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopes of
Mount Harriet, and I was left pretty much to myself.  It is a dreary,
fever-stricken place, and all beyond our little clearings was
infested with wild cannibal natives, who were ready enough to blow a
poisoned dart at us if they saw a chance.  There were digging, and
ditching, and yam-planting, and a dozen other things to be done, so
we were busy enough all day; though in the evening we had a little
time to ourselves.  Among other things, I learned to dispense drugs
for the surgeon, and picked up a smattering of his knowledge.  All
the time I was on the lookout for a chance of escape; but it is
hundreds of miles from any other land, and there is little or no wind
in those seas; so it was a terribly difficult job to get away.

"The surgeon, Doctor Somerton, was a fast, sporting young chap, and
the other young officers would meet in his rooms of an evening and
play cards.  The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next
to his sitting-room, with a small window between us.  Often, if I
felt lonesome, I used to turn out the lamp in the surgery, and then,
standing there, I could hear their talk and watch their play.  I am
fond of a hand at cards myself, and it was almost as good as having
one to watch the others.  There were Major Sholto, Captain Morstan,
and Lieutenant Bromley Brown, who were in command of the native
troops, and there were the surgeon himself, and two or three prison
officials, crafty old hands who played a nice, sly, safe game.  A
very snug little party they used to make.

"Well, there was one thing which very soon struck me, and that was
that the soldiers used always to lose and the civilians to win.
Mind, I don't say that there was anything unfair, but so it was.
These prison chaps had done little else than play cards ever since
they had been at the Andamans, and they knew each other's game to a
point, while the others just played to pass the time and threw their
cards down anyhow.  Night after night the soldiers got up poorer men,
and the poorer they got the more keen they were to play.  Major
Sholto was the hardest hit.  He used to pay in notes and gold at
first, but soon it came to notes of hand, and for big sums.  He
sometimes would win for a few deals, just to give him heart, and then
the luck would set in against him worse than ever.  All day he would
wander about as black as thunder, and he took to drinking a deal more
than was good for him.

"One night he lost even more heavily than usual.  I was sitting in my
hut when he and Captain Morstan came stumbling along on the way to
their quarters.  They were bosom friends, those two, and never far
apart.  The major was raving about his losses.

"'It's all up, Morstan,' he was saying, as they passed my hut.  'I
shall have to send in my papers.  I am a ruined man.'

"'Nonsense, old chap!' said the other, slapping him upon the
shoulder.  'I've had a nasty facer myself, but--'  That was all I
could hear, but it was enough to set me thinking.

"A couple of days later Major Sholto was strolling on the beach; so I
took the chance of speaking to him.

"'I wish to have your advice, major,' said I.

"'Well, Small, what is it?' he said, taking his cheroot from his lips.

"'I wanted to ask you, sir,' said I, 'who is the proper person to
whom hidden treasure should be handed over.  I know where half a
million worth lies, and, as I can not use it myself, I thought
perhaps the best thing that I could do would be to hand it over to
the proper authorities, and then, perhaps, they would get my sentence
shortened for me.'

"'Half a million, Small?' he gasped, looking hard at me to see if I
was in earnest.

"'Quite that, sir--in jewels and pearls.  It lies there ready for any
one.  And the queer thing about it is that the real owner is outlawed
and can not hold property, so that it belongs to the first comer.'

"'To government, Small,' he stammered; 'to government.' But he said
it in a halting fashion, and I knew in my heart that I had got him.

"'You think, then, sir, that I should give the information to the
Governor-General?' said I, quietly.

"'Well, well, you must not do anything rash, or that you might
repent.  Let me hear all about it, Small.  Give me the facts.'

"I told him the whole story, with small changes, so that he could not
identify the place.  When I had finished he stood stock-still and
full of thought.  I could see by the twitch of his lip that there was
a struggle going on within him.

"'This is a very important matter, Small,' he said, at last.  'You
must not say a word to any one about it, and I shall see you again
soon.'

"Two nights later he and his friend, Captain Morstan, came to my hut
in the dead of the night with a lantern.

"'I want you just to let Captain Morstan hear that story from your
own lips, Small,' said he.

"I repeated it as I had told it before.

"'It rings true, eh?' said he.  'It's good enough to act upon?'

Captain Morstan nodded.

"'Look here, Small,' said the major.  'We have been talking it over,
my friend here and I, and we have come to the conclusion that this
secret of yours is hardly a government matter after all, but is a
private concern of your own, which, of course, you have the power of
disposing of as you think best.  Now, the question is, what price
would you ask for it?  We might be inclined to take it up, and at
least look into it, if we could agree as to terms.'  He tried to
speak in a cool, careless way, but his eyes were shining with
excitement and greed.

"'Why, as to that, gentlemen,' I answered, trying also to be cool,
but feeling as excited as he did, 'there is only one bargain which a
man in my position can make.  I shall want you to help me to my
freedom, and to help my three companions to theirs.  We shall then
take you into partnership, and give you a fifth share to divide
between you."

"'Hum!' said he.  'A fifth share!  That is not very tempting.'

"'It would come to fifty thousand apiece,' said I.

"'But how can we gain your freedom?  You know very well that you ask
an impossibility.'

"'Nothing of the sort,' I answered.  'I have thought it all out to
the last detail.  The only bar to our escape is that we can get no
boat fit for the voyage, and no provisions to last us for so long a
time.  There are plenty of little yachts and yawls at Calcutta or
Madras which would serve our turn well.  Do you bring one over.  We
shall engage to get aboard her by night, and if you will drop us on
any part of the Indian coast you will have done your part of the
bargain.'

"'If there was only one,' he said.

"'None or all,' I answered.  'We have sworn it.  The four of us must
always act together.'

"'You see, Morstan,' said he, 'Small is a man of his word.  He does
not flinch from his friends.  I think we may very well trust him.'

"'It's a dirty business,' the other answered.  'Yet, as you say, the
money would save our commissions handsomely.'

"'Well, Small,' said the major, 'we must, I suppose, try and meet
you.  We must first, of course, test the truth of your story.  Tell
me where the box is hid, and I shall get leave of absence and go back
to India in the monthly relief-boat to inquire into the affair.'

"'Not so fast,' said I, growing colder as he got hot.  'I must have
the consent of my three comrades.  I tell you that it is four or none
with us.'

"'Nonsense!' he broke in.  'What have three black fellows to do with
our agreement?'

"'Black or blue,' said I, 'they are in with me, and we all go
together.'

"Well, the matter ended by a second meeting, at which Mohammed Singh,
Abdullah Khan, and Dost Akbar were all present.  We talked the matter
over again, and at last we came to an arrangement.  We were to
provide both the officers with charts of the part of the Agra fort,
and mark the place in the wall where the treasure was hid.  Major
Sholto was to go to India to test our story.  If he found the box he
was to leave it there, to send out a small yacht provisioned for a
voyage, which was to lie off Rutland Island, and to which we were to
make our way, and finally to return to his duties.  Captain Morstan
was then to apply for leave of absence, to meet us at Agra, and there
we were to have a final division of the treasure, he taking the
major's share as well as his own.  All this we sealed by the most
solemn oaths that the mind could think or the lips utter.  I sat up
all night with paper and ink, and by the morning I had the two charts
all ready, signed with the sign of the four--that is, of Abdullah,
Akbar, Mohammed, and myself.

"Well, gentlemen, I weary you with my long story, and I know that my
friend, Mr. Jones, is impatient to get me safely stowed in chokey.
I'll make it as short as I can.  The villain Sholto went off to
India, but he never came back again.  Captain Morstan showed me his
name among a list of passengers in one of the mail boats very shortly
afterward.  His uncle had died, leaving him a fortune, and he had
left the army, yet he could stoop to treat five men as he had treated
us.  Morstan went over to Agra shortly afterward, and found, as we
expected, that the treasure was indeed gone.  The scoundrel had
stolen it all, without carrying out one of the conditions on which we
had sold him the secret.  From that day I lived only for vengeance.
I thought of it by day and I nursed it by night.  It became an
overpowering, absorbing passion with me.  I cared nothing for the
law--nothing for the gallows.  To escape, to track down Sholto, to
have my hand upon his throat--that was my one thought Even the Agra
treasure had come to be a smaller thing in my mind than the slaying
of Sholto.

"Well, I have set my mind on many things in this life, and never one
which I did not carry out.  But it was weary years before my time
came.  I have told you that I had picked up something of medicine.
One day, when Doctor Somerton was down with a fever, a little Andaman
Islander was picked up by a convict-gang in the woods.  He was sick
to death, and had gone to a lonely place to die.  I took him in hand,
though he was as venomous as a young snake, and after a couple of
months I got him all right and able to walk.  He took a kind of fancy
to me then, and would hardly go back to his woods, but was always
hanging about my hut.  I learned a little of his lingo from him, and
this made him all the fonder of me.

"Tonga--for that was his name--was a fine boatman, and owned a big,
roomy canoe of his own.  When I found that he was devoted to me and
would do anything to serve me, I saw my chance to escape.  I talked
it over with him.  He was to bring his boat round on a certain night
to an old wharf which was never guarded, and there he was to pick me
up.  I gave him directions to have several gourds of water and a lot
of yams, cocoanuts, and sweet potatoes.

"He was stanch and true, was little Tonga.  No man ever had a more
faithful mate.  At the night named he had his boat at the wharf.  As
it chanced, however, there was one of the convict-guard down there--a
vile Pathan who had never missed a chance of insulting and injuring
me.  I had always vowed vengeance, and now I had my chance.  It was
as if fate had placed him in my way that I might pay my debt before I
left the island.  He stood on the bank with his back to me, and his
carbine on his shoulder.  I looked about for a stone to beat out his
brains with, but none could I see.  Then a queer thought came into my
head and showed me where I could lay my hand on a weapon.  I sat down
in the darkness and unstrapped my wooden leg.  With three long hops I
was on him.  He put his carbine to his shoulder, but I struck him
full and knocked the whole front of his skull in.  You can see the
split in the wood now where I hit him.  We both went down together,
for I could not keep my balance, but when I got up I found him still
lying quiet enough.  I made for the boat, and in an hour we were well
out at sea.  Tonga had brought all his earthly possessions with him,
his arms and his gods.  Among other things, he had a long bamboo
spear, and some Andaman cocoanut matting, with which I made a sort of
a sail.  For ten days we were beating about, trusting to luck, and on
the eleventh we were picked up by a trader which was going from
Singapore to Jiddah with a cargo of Malay pilgrims.  They were a rum
crowd, and Tonga and I soon managed to settle down among them.  They
had one very good quality; they let you alone and asked no questions.

"Well, if I were to tell you all the adventures that my little chum
and I went through, you would not thank me, for I would have you here
until the sun was shining.  Here and there we drifted about the
world, something always turning up to keep us from London.  All the
time, however, I never lost sight of my purpose.  I would dream of
Sholto at night.  A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep.  At
last, however, some three or four years ago, we found ourselves in
England.  I had no great difficulty in finding where Sholto lived,
and I set to work to discover whether he had realized the treasure or
if he still had it.  I made friends with some one who could help
me--I name no names, for I don't want to get any one else in a
hole--and I soon found that he still had the jewels.  Then I tried to
get at him in many ways; but he was pretty sly, and had always two
prize-fighters, besides his sons and his khitmutgar, on guard over
him.

"One day, however, I got word that he was dying.  I hurried at once
to the garden, mad that he should slip out of my clutches like that,
and, looking through the window, I saw him lying in his bed, with his
sons on each side of him.  I'd have come through and taken my chance
with the three of them, only, even as I looked at him, his jaw
dropped, and I knew that he was gone.  I got into his room that same
night, though, and I searched his papers to see if there was any
record of where he had hidden our jewels.  There was not a line,
however; so I came away, bitter and savage as a man could be.  Before
I left I bethought me that if I ever met my Sikh friends again it
would be a satisfaction to know that I had left some mark of our
hatred; so I scrawled down the sign of the four of us, as it had been
on the chart, and I pinned it on his bosom.  It was too much that he
should be taken to the grave without some token from the men whom he
had robbed and befooled.

"We earned a living at this time by my exhibiting poor Tonga at fairs
and other such places as the black cannibal.  He would eat raw meat
and dance his war-dance; so we always had a hatful of pennies after a
day's work.  I still heard all the news from Pondicherry Lodge, and
for some years there was no news to hear, except that they were
hunting for the treasure.  At last, however, came what we had waited
for so long.  The treasure had been found.  It was up at the top of
the house, in Mr. Bartholomew Sholto's chemical laboratory.  I came
at once and had a look at the place, but I could not see how, with my
wooden leg, I was to make my way up to it.  I learned, however, about
a trap-door in the roof, and also about Mr. Sholto's supper-hour.  It
seemed to me that I could manage the thing easily through Tonga.  I
brought him out with me with a long rope wound round his waist.  He
could climb like a cat, and he soon made his way through the roof,
but, as ill-luck would have it, Bartholomew Sholto was still in the
room, to his cost.  Tonga thought he had done something very clever
in killing him, for when I came up by the rope I found him strutting
about as proud as a peacock.  Very much surprised was he when I made
at him with the rope's end and cursed him for a little bloodthirsty
imp.  I took the treasure-box and let it down, and then slid down
myself, having first left the sign of the four upon the table, to
show that the jewels had come back at last to those who had most
right to them.  Tonga then pulled up the rope, closed the window, and
made off the way that he had come.

"I don't know that I have anything else to tell you.  I had heard a
waterman speak of the speed of Smith's launch, the 'Aurora,' so I
thought she would be a handy craft for our escape.  I engaged with
old Smith, and was to give him a big sum if he got us safe to our
ship.  He knew, no doubt, that there was some screw loose, but he was
not in our secrets.  All this is the truth, and if I tell it to you,
gentlemen, it is not to amuse you--for you have not done me a very
good turn--but it is because I believe the best defense I can make is
just to hold back nothing, but let all the world know how badly I
have myself been served by Major Sholto, and how innocent I am of the
death of his son."

"A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes.  "A fitting
wind-up to an extremely interesting case.  There is nothing at all
new to me in the latter part of your narrative, except that you
brought your own rope.  That I did not know.  By the way, I had hoped
that Tonga had lost all his darts; yet he managed to shoot one at us
in the boat."

"He had lost them all, sir, except the one which was in his blow-pipe
at the time."

"Ah, of course," said Holmes, "I had not thought of that."

"Is there any other point which you would like to ask about?" asked
the convict, affably.

"I think not, thank you," my companion answered.

"Well, Holmes," said Athelney Jones, "you are a man to be humored,
and we all know that you are a connoisseur of crime, but duty is
duty, and I have gone rather far in doing what you and your friend
asked me.  I shall feel more at ease when we have our story-teller
here safe under lock and key.  The cab still waits, and there are two
inspectors downstairs.  I am much obliged to you both for your
assistance.  Of course you will be wanted at the trial.  Good-night
to you."

"Good-night, gentlemen both," said Jonathan Small.

"You first, Small," remarked the wary Jones as they left the room.
"I'll take particular care that you don't club me with your wooden
leg, whatever you may have done to the gentleman at the Andaman
Isles."

"Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, after
we had sat some time looking in silence.  "I fear that it may be the
last investigation in which I shall have the chance of studying your
methods.  Miss Morstan has done me the honor to accept me as a
husband in prospective."

He gave a most dismal groan.  "I feared as much," said he; "I really
can not congratulate you."

I was a little hurt.  "Have you any reason to be dissatisfied with my
choice?" I asked.

"Not at all.  I think she is one of the most charming young ladies I
ever met, and might have been most useful in such work as we have
been doing.  She has a decided genius that way; witness the way in
which she preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her
father.  But love is an emotional thing, and whatever is emotional is
opposed to that true cold reason which I place above all things.  I
should never marry myself, lest I bias my judgment."

"I trust," said I, laughing, "that my judgment may survive the
ordeal.  But you look weary."

"Yes, the reaction is already upon me.  I shall be as limp as a rag
for a week."

"Strange," said I, "how terms of what in another man I should call
laziness alternate with fits of splendid energy and vigor."

"Yes," he answered, "there are in me the makings of a very fine
loafer, and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow.  I often think of
those lines of old Goethe--

  ''Schade dass die Natur nur _einen_ Mensch aus dir schuf,
  Denn zum wurdigen Mann war und zum Schelmen der Stoff.'

By the way, apropos of this Norwood business, you see that they had,
as I surmised, a confederate in the house, who could be none other
than Lal Rao, the butler; so Jones actually has the undivided honor
of having caught one fish in his great haul."

"The division seems rather unfair," I remarked.  "You have done all
the work in this business.  I get a wife out of it, Jones gets the
credit, pray what remains for you?"

"For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains the cocaine
bottle."  And he stretched his long white hand up for it.




A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

BY SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

_"A Scandal in Bohemia," which many people consider the author's best
short story, describes the one instance in which Sherlock Holmes
acknowledges himself "beaten by a woman's wit"; he always speaks of
Irene Adler as THE woman.  St. John's Wood, London, where the scene
of the story is laid, is well known as the quarter of the city in
which the professional artistic element of the population resides._



A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

By SIR ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE


I

To Sherlock Holmes she is always _the_ woman.  I have seldom heard
him mention her under any other name.  In his eyes she eclipses and
predominates the whole of her sex.  It was not that he felt any
emotion akin to love for Irene Adler.  All emotions, and that one
particularly, were abhorrent to his cold, precise, but admirably
balanced mind.  He was, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and
observing machine that the world has seen; but as a lover he would
have placed himself in a false position.  He never spoke of the
softer passions, save with a gibe and a sneer.  They were admirable
things for the observer--excellent for drawing the veil from men's
motives and actions.  But for the trained reasoner to admit such
intrusions into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was
to introduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all
his mental results.  Grit in a sensitive instrument, or a crack in
one of his own high-power lenses, would not be more disturbing than a
strong emotion in a nature such as his.  And yet there was but one
woman to him, and that woman was the late Irene Adler, of dubious and
questionable memory.

I had seen little of Holmes lately.  My marriage had drifted us away
from each other.  My own complete happiness, and the home-centred
interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master
of his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention;
while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his whole
Bohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried among
his old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine and
ambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of his
own keen nature.  He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the
study of crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary
powers of observation in following out those clues, and clearing up
those mysteries, which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official
police.  From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings;
of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his
clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at
Trincomalee, and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so
delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland.
Beyond these signs of his activity, however, which I merely shared
with all the readers of the daily press, I knew little of my former
friend and companion.

One night--it was on the 20th of March, 1888--I was returning from a
journey to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practise), when
my way led me through Baker Street.  As I passed the well-remembered
door, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, and
with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with a
keen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing his
extraordinary powers.  His rooms were brilliantly lighted, and even
as I looked up, I saw his tall spare figure pass twice in a dark
silhouette against the blind.  He was pacing the room swiftly,
eagerly, with his head sunk upon his chest, and his hands clasped
behind him.  To me, who knew his every mood and habit, his attitude
and manner told their own story.  He was at work again.  He had risen
out of his drug-created dreams, and was hot upon the scent of some
new problem.  I rang the bell, and was shown up to the chamber which
had formerly been in part my own.

His manner was not effusive.  It seldom was; but he was glad, I
think, to see me.  With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye,
he waved me to an armchair, threw across his case of cigars, and
indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner.  Then he stood
before the fire, and looked me over in his singular introspective
fashion.

"Wedlock suits you," he remarked.  "I think, Watson, that you have
put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you."

"Seven," I answered.

"Indeed, I should have thought a little more.  Just a trifle more, I
fancy, Watson.  And in practise again, I observe.  You did not tell
me that you intended to go into harness."

"Then how do you know?"

"I see it, I deduce it.  How do I know that you have been getting
yourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and
careless servant-girl?"

"My dear Holmes," said I, "this is too much.  You would certainly
have been burned had you lived a few centuries ago.  It is true that
I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess;
but as I have changed my clothes, I can't imagine how you deduce it.
As to Mary Jane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her
notice; but there again I fail to see how you work it out."

He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.

"It is simplicity itself," said he; "my eyes tell me that on the
inside of your left shoe, just where the fire-light strikes it, the
leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts.  Obviously they have
been caused by some one who has very carelessly scraped round the
edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it.  Hence, you
see, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, and
that you had a particularly malignant boot-slicking specimen of the
London slavey.  As to your practise, if a gentleman walks into my
rooms, smelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver
upon his right forefinger, and a bulge on the side of his top-hat to
show where he has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull indeed if
I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical
profession."

I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his
process of deduction.  "When I hear you give your reasons," I
remarked, "the thing always appears to me so ridiculously simple that
I could easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of
your reasoning I am baffled, until you explain your process.  And
yet, I believe that my eyes are as good as yours."

"Quite so," he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himself
down Into an armchair.  "You see, but you do not observe.  The
distinction is clear.  For example, you have frequently seen the
steps which lead up from the hall to this room."

"Frequently."

"How often?"

"Well, some hundreds of times."

"Then how many are there?"

"How many?  I don't know."

"Quite so!  You have not observed.  And yet you have seen.  That is
just my point.  Now, I know there are seventeen steps, because I have
both seen and observed.  By the way, since you are interested in
these little problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one
or two of my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this."
He threw over a sheet of thick pink-tinted note-paper which had been
lying open upon the table.  "It came by the last post," said he.
"Read it aloud."

The note was undated, and without either signature or address.

"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o'clock,"
it said, "a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the
very deepest moment.  Your recent services to one of the royal houses
of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with
matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.
This account of you we have from all quarters received.  Be in your
chamber, then, at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitor
wears a mask."

"This is indeed a mystery," I remarked.  "What do you imagine that it
means?"

"I have no data yet.  It is a capital mistake to theorize before one
has data.  Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories,
instead of theories to suit facts.  But the note itself--what do you
deduce from it?"

I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it was
written.

"The man who wrote it was presumably well-to-do," I remarked,
endeavoring to imitate my companion's processes.  "Such paper could
not be bought under half a crown a packet.  It is peculiarly strong
and stiff."

"Peculiar--that is the very word," said Holmes.  "It is not an
English paper at all.  Hold it up to the light."

I did so, and saw a large _E_ with a small _g_, a _P_ and a large _G_
with a small _t_ woven into the texture of the paper.

"What do you make of that?" asked Holmes.

"The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather."

"Not at all.  The _G_ with the small _t_ stands for 'Gesellschaft,'
which is the German for 'Company.'  It is a customary contraction
like our 'Co.'  _P_, of course, stands for 'Papier.'  Now for the
_Eg_.  Let us glance at our 'Continental Gazetteer.'"  He took down a
heavy brown volume from his shelves.  "Eglow, Eglonitz--here we are,
Egria.  It is in a German-speaking country--in Bohemia, not far from
Carlsbad.  'Remarkable as being the scene of the death of
Wallenstein, and for its numerous glass factories and paper mills.'
Ha! ha! my boy, what do you make of that?"  His eyes sparkled, and he
sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette.

"The paper was made in Bohemia," I said.

"Precisely.  And the man who wrote the note is a German.  Do you note
the peculiar construction of the sentence--'This account of you we
have from all quarters received'?  A Frenchman or Russian could not
have written that.  It is the German who is so uncourteous to his
verbs.  It only remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by
this German who writes upon Bohemian paper, and prefers wearing a
mask to showing his face.  And here he comes, if I am not mistaken,
to resolve all our doubts."

As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses' hoofs and grating
wheels against the curb followed by a sharp pull at the bell.  Holmes
whistled.

"A pair, by the sound," said he.  "Yes," he continued, glancing out
of the window.  "A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties.  A
hundred and fifty guineas apiece.  There's money in this case,
Watson, if there is nothing else."

"I think I had better go, Holmes."

"Not a bit, doctor.  Stay where you are.  I am lost without my
Boswell.  And this promises to be interesting.  It would be a pity to
miss it."

"But your client--"

"Never mind him.  I may want your help, and so may he.  Here he
comes.  Sit down in that armchair, doctor, and give us your best
attention."

A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in
the passage, paused immediately outside the door.

Then there was a loud and authoritative tap.

"Come in!" said Holmes.

A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six
inches in height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules.  His dress
was rich with a richness which would, in England, be looked upon as
akin to bad taste.  Heavy bands of astrakhan were slashed across the
sleeves and front of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue
cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined with
flame-colored silk, and secured at the neck with a brooch which
consisted of a single flaming beryl.  Boots which extended half-way
up his calves, and which were trimmed at the tops with rich brown
fur, completed the impression of barbaric opulence which was
suggested by his whole appearance.  He carried a broad-brimmed hat in
his hand, while he wore across the upper part of his face, extending
down past the cheek-bones, a black visard-mask, which he had
apparently adjusted that very moment, for his hand was still raised
to it as he entered.  From the lower part of the face he appeared to
be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanging lip, and a long,
straight chin, suggestive of resolution pushed to the length of
obstinacy.

"You had my note?" he asked, with a deep, harsh voice and a strongly
marked German accent.  "I told you that I would call."  He looked
from one to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.

"Pray take a seat," said Holmes.  "This is my friend and colleague,
Doctor Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my
cases.  Whom have I the honor to address?"

"You may address me as the Count von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman.  I
understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honor and
discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extreme
importance.  If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you
alone."

I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back
into my chair.  "It is both, or none," said he.  "You may say before
this gentleman anything which you may say to me."

The count shrugged his broad shoulders.  "Then I must begin," said
he, "by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years; at the
end of that time the matter will be of no importance.  At present it
is not too much to say that it is of such weight that it may have an
influence upon European history."

"I promise," said Holmes.

"And I."

"You will excuse this mask," continued our strange visitor.  "The
august person who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you,
and I may confess at once that the title by which I have just called
myself is not exactly my own."

"I was aware of it," said Holmes, dryly.

"The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution has to
be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal, and
seriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe.  To
speak plainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein,
hereditary kings of Bohemia."

"I was also aware of that," murmured Holmes, settling himself down in
his armchair, and closing his eyes.

Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,
lounging figure of the man who had been, no doubt, depicted to him as
the most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe.
Holmes slowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his
gigantic client.

"If your majesty would condescend to state your case," he remarked,
"I should be better able to advise you."

The man sprang from his chair, and paced up and down the room in
uncontrollable agitation.  Then, with a gesture of desperation, he
tore the mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground.

"You are right," he cried, "I am the king.  Why should I attempt to
conceal it?"

"Why, indeed?" murmured Holmes.  "Your majesty had not spoken before
I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von
Ormstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King of
Bohemia."

"But you can understand," said our strange visitor, sitting down once
more and passing his hand over his high, white forehead, "you can
understand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my own
person.  Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it
to an agent without putting myself in his power.  I have come
incognito from Prague for the purpose of consulting you."

"Then, pray consult," said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.

"The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthy
visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known
adventuress Irene Adler.  The name is no doubt familiar to you."

"Kindly look her up in my index, doctor," murmured Holmes, without
opening his eyes.  For many years he had adopted a system for
docketing all paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was
difficult to name a subject or a person on which he could not at once
furnish information.  In this case I found her biography sandwiched
in between that of a Hebrew rabbi and that of a staff-commander who
had written a monogram upon the deep-sea fishes.

"Let me see!" said Holmes.  "Hum!  Born in New Jersey in the year
1858.  Contralto--hum!  La Scala--hum!  Prima donna Imperial Opera of
Warsaw--yes!  Retired from operatic stage--ha!  Living in
London--quite so!  Your majesty, as I understand, became entangled
with this young person, wrote her some compromising letters, and is
now desirous of getting those letters back."

"Precisely so.  But how--"

"Was there a secret marriage?"

"None."

"No legal papers or certificates?"

"None."

"Then I fail to follow your majesty.  If this young person should
produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she to
prove their authenticity?"

"There is the writing."

"Pooh, pooh!  Forgery."

"My private note-paper."

"Stolen."

"My own seal."

"Imitated."

"My photograph."

"Bought."

"We were both in the photograph."

"Oh, dear!  That is very bad.  Your majesty has indeed committed an
indiscretion."

"I was mad--insane."

"You have compromised yourself seriously."

"I was only crown prince then.  I was young.  I am but thirty now."

"It must be recovered."

"We have tried and failed."

"Your majesty must pay.  It must be bought."

"She will not sell."

"Stolen, then."

"Five attempts have been made.  Twice burglars in my pay ransacked
her house.  Once we diverted her luggage when she traveled.  Twice
she has been waylaid.  There has been no result."

"No sign of it?"

"Absolutely none."

Holmes laughed.  "It is quite a pretty little problem," said he.

"But a very serious one to me," returned the king, reproachfully.

"Very, indeed.  And what does she propose to do with the photograph?"

"To ruin me."

"But how?"

"I am about to be married."

"So I have heard."

"To Clotilde Lotham von Saxe-Meiningen, second daughter of the King
of Scandinavia.  You may know the strict principles of her family.
She is herself the very soul of delicacy.  A shadow of a doubt as to
my conduct would bring the matter to an end."

"And Irene Adler?"

"Threatens to send them the photograph.  And she will do it.  I know
that she will do it.  You do not know her, but she has a soul of
steel.  She has the face of the most beautiful of women and the mind
of the most resolute of men.  Rather than I should marry another
woman, there are no lengths to which she would not go--none."

"You are sure that she has not sent it yet?"

"I am sure."

"And why?"

"Because she has said that she would send it on the day when the
betrothal was publicly proclaimed.  That will be next Monday."

"Oh, then we have three days yet," said Holmes, with a yawn.  "That
is very fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look
into just at present.  Your majesty will, of course, stay in London
for the present?"

"Certainly.  You will find me at the Langham, under the name of the
Count von Kramm."

"Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress."

"Pray do so; I shall be all anxiety."

"Then, as to money?"

"You have carte blanche."

"Absolutely?"

"I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom to
have that photograph."

"And for present expenses?"

The king took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak, and
laid it on the table.

"There are three hundred pounds in gold, and seven hundred in notes,"
he said.

Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book, and handed
it to him.

"And mademoiselle's address?" he asked.

"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John's Wood."

Holmes took a note of it.  "One other question," said he,
thoughtfully.  "Was the photograph a cabinet?"

"It was."

"Then, good-night, your majesty, and I trust that we shall soon have
some good news for you.  And good-night, Watson," he added, as the
wheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street.  "If you will be
good enough to call to-morrow afternoon, at three o'clock, I should
like to chat this little matter over with you."



II

At three o'clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had not
yet returned.  The landlady informed me that he had left the house
shortly after eight o'clock in the morning.  I sat down beside the
fire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long he
might be.  I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for,
though it was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features
which were associated with the two crimes which I have already
recorded, still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of
his client gave it a character of its own.  Indeed, apart from the
nature of the investigation which my friend had on hand, there was
something in his masterly grasp of a situation, and his keen,
incisive reasoning, which made it a pleasure to me to study his
system of work, and to follow the quick, subtle methods by which he
disentangled the most inextricable mysteries.  So accustomed was I to
his invariable success that the very possibility of his failing had
ceased to enter into my head.

It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-looking
groom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face and
disreputable clothes, walked into the room.  Accustomed as I was to
my friend's amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to look
three times before I was certain that it was indeed he.  With a nod
he vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutes
tweed-suited and respectable, as of old.  Putting his hand into his
pockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire, and laughed
heartily for some minutes.

"Well, really!" he cried, and then he choked, and laughed again until
he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.

"What is it?"

"It's quite too funny.  I am sure you could never guess how I
employed my morning, or what I ended by doing."

"I can't imagine.  I suppose that you have been watching the habits,
and, perhaps, the house of Miss Irene Adler."

"Quite so, but the sequel was rather unusual.  I will tell you,
however.  I left the house a little after eight o'clock this morning
in the character of a groom out of work.  There is a wonderful
sympathy and freemasonry among horsy men.  Be one of them, and you
will know all that there is to know.  I soon found Briony Lodge.  It
is a bijou villa, with a garden at the back, but built out in front
right up to the road, two stories.  Chubb lock to the door.  Large
sitting-room on the right side, well furnished, with long windows
almost to the floor, and those preposterous English window-fasteners
which a child could open.  Behind there was nothing remarkable, save
that the passage window could be reached from the top of the
coach-house.  I walked round it and examined it closely from every
point of view, but without noting anything else of interest.

"I then lounged down the street, and found, as I expected, that there
was a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden.  I
lent the hostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and I received
in exchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag
tobacco, and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler,
to say nothing of half a dozen other people in the neighborhood, in
whom I was not in the least interested, but whose biographies I was
compelled to listen to."

"And what of Irene Adler?" I asked.

"Oh, she has turned all the men's heads down in that part.  She is
the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet.  So say the
Serpentine Mews, to a man.  She lives quietly, sings at concerts,
drives out at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner.
Seldom goes out at other times, except when she sings.  Has only one
male visitor, but a good deal of him.  He is dark, handsome, and
dashing; never calls less than once a day, and often twice.  He is a
Mr. Godfrey Norton of the Inner Temple.  See the advantages of a
cabman as a confidant.  They had driven him home a dozen times from
Serpentine Mews, and knew all about him.  When I had listened to all
that they had to tell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge
once more, and to think over my plan of campaign.

"This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in the matter.
He was a lawyer.  That sounded ominous.  What was the relation
between them, and what the object of his repeated visits?  Was she
his client, his friend, or his mistress?  If the former, she had
probably transferred the photograph to his keeping.  If the latter,
it was less likely.  On the issue of this question depended whether I
should continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to the
gentleman's chambers in the Temple.  It was a delicate point, and it
widened the field of my inquiry.  I fear that I bore you with these
details, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you are
to understand the situation."

"I am following you closely," I answered.

"I was still balancing the matter in my mind when a hansom cab drove
up to Briony Lodge and a gentleman sprang out.  He was a remarkably
handsome man, dark, aquiline, and mustached--evidently the man of
whom I had heard.  He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the
cabman to wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door, with
the air of a man who was thoroughly at home.

"He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses
of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down,
talking excitedly and waving his arms.  Of her I could see nothing.
Presently he emerged, looking even more flurried than before.  As he
stepped up to the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and
looked at it earnestly.  'Drive like the devil!' he shouted, 'first
to Gross & Hankey's in Regent Street, and then to the Church of St.
Monica in the Edgeware Road.  Half a guinea if you do it in twenty
minutes!'

"Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not do
well to follow them, when up the lane came a neat little landau, the
coachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear,
while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles.
It hadn't pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it.
I only caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely
woman, with a face that a man might die for.

"'The Church of St. Monica, John," she cried; "and half a sovereign
if you reach it in twenty minutes."

"This was quite too good to lose, Watson.  I was just balancing
whether I should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her
landau, when a cab came through the street.  The driver looked twice
at such a shabby fare; but I jumped in before he could object.  'The
Church of St. Monica,' said I, 'and half a sovereign if you reach it
in twenty minutes.'  It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of
course it was clear enough what was in the wind.

"My cabby drove fast.  I don't think I ever drove faster, but the
others were there before us.  The cab and landau with their steaming
horses were in front of the door when I arrived.  I paid the man, and
hurried into the church.  There was not a soul there save the two
whom I had followed, and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be
expostulating with them.  They were all three standing in a knot in
front of the altar.  I lounged up the side aisle like any other idler
who has dropped into a church.  Suddenly, to my surprise, the three
at the altar faced round to me, and Godfrey Norton came running as
hard as he could toward me.

"'Thank God!' he cried.  'You'll do.  Come!  Come!'

"'What then?' I asked.

"'Come, man, come; only three minutes, or it won't be legal.'

"I was half-dragged up to the altar, and, before I knew where I was,
I found myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, and
vouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assisting
in the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,
bachelor.  It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentleman
thanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while the
clergyman beamed on me in front.  It was the most preposterous
position in which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the
thought of it that started me laughing just now.  It seems that there
had been some informality about their license; that the clergyman
absolutely refused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and
that my lucky appearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally
out into the streets in search of a best man.  The bride gave me a
sovereign, and I mean to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the
occasion."

"This is a very unexpected turn of affairs," said I; "and what then?"

"Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced.  It looked as if the
pair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very
prompt and energetic measures on my part.  At the church door,
however, they separated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to
her own house.  'I shall drive out in the park at five as usual,' she
said, as she left him.  I heard no more.  They drove away in
different directions, and I went off to make my own arrangements."

"Which are?"

"Some cold beef and a glass of beer," he answered, ringing the bell.
"I have been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier
still this evening.  By the way, doctor, I shall want your
cooperation."

"I shall be delighted."

"You don't mind breaking the law?"

"Not in the least."

"Nor running a chance of arrest?"

"Not in a good cause."

"Oh, the cause is excellent!"

"Then I am your man."

"I was sure that I might rely on you."

"But what is it you wish?"

"When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear to
you.  Now," he said, as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that
our landlady had provided, "I must discuss it while I eat, for I have
not much time.  It is nearly five now.  In two hours we must be on
the scene of action.  Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her
drive at seven.  We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her."

"And what then?"

"You must leave that to me.  I have already arranged what is to
occur.  There is only one point on which I must insist.  You must not
interfere, come what may.  You understand?"

"I am to be neutral?"

"To do nothing whatever.  There will probably be some small
unpleasantness.  Do not join in it.  It will end in my being conveyed
into the house.  Four or five minutes afterward the sitting-room
window will open.  You are to station yourself close to that open
window."

"Yes."

"You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you."

"Yes."

"And when I raise my hand--so--you will throw into the room what I
give you to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire.
You quite follow me?"

"Entirely."

"It is nothing very formidable," he said, taking a long, cigar-shaped
roll from his pocket.  "It is an ordinary plumber's smoke-rocket,
fitted with a cap at either end, to make it self-lighting.  Your task
is confined to that.  When you raise your cry of fire, it will be
taken up by quite a number of people.  You may then walk to the end
of the street, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes.  I hope that I
have made myself clear?"

"I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and,
at the signal, to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of
fire, and to wait you at the corner of the street."

"Precisely."

"Then you may entirely rely on me."

"That is excellent.  I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I
prepared for the new r√¥le I have to play."

He disappeared into his bedroom, and returned in a few minutes in the
character of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman.
His broad, black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his
sympathetic smile, and general look of peering and benevolent
curiosity were such as Mr. John Hare alone could have equaled.  It
was not merely that Holmes changed his costume.  His expression, his
manner, his very soul seemed to vary with every fresh part that he
assumed.  The stage lost a fine actor, even as science lost an acute
reasoner, when he became a specialist in crime.

It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it still
wanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in Serpentine
Avenue.  It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted
as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the
coming of its occupant.  The house was just such as I had pictured it
from Sherlock Holmes's succinct description, but the locality
appeared to be less private than I expected.  On the contrary, for a
small street in a quiet neighborhood, it was remarkably animated.
There was a group of shabbily dressed men smoking and laughing in a
corner, a scissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were
flirting with a nurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who
were lounging up and down with cigars in their mouths.

"You see," remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of the
house, "this marriage rather simplifies matters.  The photograph
becomes a double-edged weapon now.  The chances are that she would be
as averse to its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton as our client is to
its coming to the eyes of his princess.  Now the question is--where
are we to find the photograph?"

"Where, indeed?"

"It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her.  It is
cabinet size.  Too large for easy concealment about a woman's dress.
She knows that the king is capable of having her waylaid and
searched.  Two attempts of the sort have already been made.  We may
take it, then, that she does not carry it about with her."

"Where, then?"

"Her banker or her lawyer.  There is that double possibility.  But I
am inclined to think neither.  Women are naturally secretive, and
they like to do their own secreting.  Why should she hand it over to
any one else?  She could trust her own guardianship, but she could
not tell what indirect or political influence might be brought to
bear upon a business man.  Besides, remember that she had resolved to
use it within a few days.  It must be where she can lay her hands
upon it.  It must be in her own house."

"But it has twice been burglarized."

"Pshaw!  They did not know how to look."

"But how will you look?"

"I will not look."

"What then?"

"I will get her to show me."

"But she will refuse."

"She will not be able to.  But I hear the rumble of wheels.  It is
her carriage.  Now carry out my orders to the letter."

As he spoke, the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round
the curve of the avenue.  It was a smart little landau which rattled
up to the door of Briony Lodge.  As it pulled up one of the loafing
men at the corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of
earning a copper, but was elbowed away by another loafer who had
rushed up with the same intention.  A fierce quarrel broke out which
was increased by the two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the
loungers, and by the scissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the
other side.  A blow was struck, and in an instant the lady, who had
stepped from her carriage, was the centre of a little knot of
struggling men who struck savagely at each other with their fists and
sticks.  Holmes dashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but, just
as he reached her, he gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the
blood running freely down his face.  At his fall the guardsmen took
to their heels in one direction and the loungers in the other, while
a number of better dressed people who had watched the scuffle without
taking part in it crowded in to help the lady and to attend to the
injured man.  Irene Adler, as I will still call her, had hurried up
the steps; but she stood at the top, with her superb figure outlined
against the lights of the hall, looking back into the street.

"Is the poor gentleman much hurt?" she asked.

"He is dead," cried several voices.

"No, no, there's life in him," shouted another.  "But he'll be gone
before you can get him to the hospital."

"He's a brave fellow," said a woman.  "They would have had the lady's
purse and watch if it hadn't been for him.  They were a gang, and a
rough one, too.  Ah! he's breathing now."

"He can't lie in the street.  May we bring him in, marm?"

"Surely.  Bring him into the sitting-room.  There is a comfortable
sofa.  This way, please."  Slowly and solemnly he was borne into
Briony Lodge, and laid out in the principal room, while I still
observed the proceedings from my post by the window.  The lamps had
been lighted, but the blinds had not been drawn, so that I could see
Holmes as he lay upon the couch.  I do not know whether he was seized
with compunction at that moment for the part he was playing, but I
know that I never felt more heartily ashamed of myself in my life
when I saw the beautiful creature against whom I was conspiring, or
the grace and kindliness with which she waited upon the injured man.
And yet it would be the blackest treachery to Holmes to draw back now
from the part which he had entrusted to me.  I hardened my heart, and
took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster.  After all, I thought, we
are not injuring her.  We are but preventing her from injuring
another.

Holmes had sat upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man who is
in need of air.  A maid rushed across and threw open the window.  At
the same instant I saw him raise his hand, and at the signal I tossed
my rocket into the room with a cry of "Fire!"  The word was no sooner
out of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed and
ill--gentlemen-hostlers, and servant-maids--joined in a general
shriek of "Fire!"  Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room, and
out at the open window.  I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a
moment later the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it
was a false alarm.  Slipping through the shouting crowd, I made my
way to the corner of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to
find my friend's arm in mine, and to get away from the scene of
uproar.  He walked swiftly and in silence for some few minutes, until
we had turned down one of the quiet streets which led toward the
Edgware Road.

"You did it very nicely, doctor," he remarked.  "Nothing could have
been better.  It is all right."

"You have the photograph?"

"I know where it is."

"And how did you find out?"

"She showed me, as I told you that she would."

"I am still in the dark."

"I do not wish to make a mystery," said he, laughing.  "The matter
was perfectly simple.  You, of course, saw that every one in the
street was an accomplice.  They were all engaged for the evening."

"I guessed as much."

"Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in the
palm of my hand.  I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to my
face, and became a piteous spectacle.  It is an old trick."

"That also I could fathom."

"Then they carried me in.  She was bound to have me in.  What else
could she do?  And into her sitting-room, which was the very room
which I suspected.  It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was
determined to see which.  They laid me on a couch, I motioned for
air, they were compelled to open the window, and you had your chance."

"How did that help you?"

"It was all-important.  When a woman thinks that her house is on
fire, her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values
most.  It is a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than
once taken advantage of it.  In the case of the Darlington
Substitution Scandal it was of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth
Castle business.  A married woman grabs at her baby--an unmarried one
reaches for her jewel-box.  Now it was clear to me that our lady of
to-day had nothing in the house more precious to her than what we are
in quest of.  She would rush to secure it.  The alarm of fire was
admirably done.  The smoke and shouting were enough to shake nerves
of steel.  She responded beautifully.  The photograph is in a recess
behind a sliding panel just above the right bell-pull.  She was there
in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it as she half drew it out.
When I cried out that it was a false alarm, she replaced it, glanced
at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I have not seen her since.
I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from the house.  I hesitated
whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once; but the coachman
had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly, it seemed safer to
wait.  A little overprecipitance may ruin all."

"And now?" I asked.

"Our quest is practically finished.  I shall call with the king
to-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us.  We will be
shown into the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable
that when she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph.  It
might be a satisfaction to his majesty to regain it with his own
hands."

"And when will you call?"

"At eight in the morning.  She will not be up, so that we shall have
a clear field.  Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may
mean a complete change in her life and habits.  I must wire to the
king without delay."

We had reached Baker Street, and had stopped at the door.  He was
searching his pockets for the key, when some one passing said:

"Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes."

There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the
greeting appeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had
hurried by.

"I've heard that voice before," said Holmes, staring down the dimly
lighted street.  "Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been?"



III

I slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our
toast and coffee in the morning, when the King of Bohemia rushed into
the room.

"You have really got it?" he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by
either shoulder, and looking eagerly into his face.

"Not yet."

"But you have hopes?"

"I have hopes."

"Then come.  I am all impatience to be gone."

"We must have a cab."

"No, my brougham is waiting."

"Then that will simplify matters."  We descended, and started off
once more for Briony Lodge.

"Irene Adler is married," remarked Holmes.

"Married!  When?"

"Yesterday."

"But to whom?"

"To an English lawyer named Norton."

"But she could not love him."

"I am in hopes that she does."

"And why in hopes?"

"Because it would spare your majesty all fear of future annoyance.
If the lady loves her husband, she does not love your majesty.  If
she does not love your majesty, there is no reason why she should
interfere with your majesty's plan."

"It is true.  And yet--  Well, I wish she had been of my own station.
What a queen she would have made!"  He relapsed into a moody silence,
which was not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.

The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood upon
the steps.  She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from the
brougham.

"Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?" said she.

"I am Mr. Holmes," answered my companion, looking at her with a
questioning and rather startled gaze.

"Indeed!  My mistress told me that you were likely to call.  She left
this morning, with her husband, by the 5:15 train from Charing Cross,
for the Continent."

"What!"  Sherlock Holmes staggered back white with chagrin and
surprise.

"Do you mean that she has left England?"

"Never to return."

"And the papers?" asked the king, hoarsely.  "All is lost!"

"We shall see."  He pushed past the servant, and rushed into the
drawing-room, followed by the king and myself.  The furniture was
scattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves, and open
drawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her
flight.  Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding
shutter, and plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a
letter.  The photograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress;
the letter was superscribed to "Sherlock Holmes, Esq.  To be left
till called for."  My friend tore it open, and we all three read it
together.  It was dated at midnight of the preceding night, and ran
in this way:


"MY DEAR MR. SHERLOCK HOLMES;--You really did it very well.  You took
me in completely.  Until after the alarm of the fire, I had not a
suspicion.  But then, when I found how I had betrayed myself, I began
to think.  I had been warned against you months ago.  I had been told
that if the king employed an agent, it would certainly be you.  And
your address had been given me.  Yet, with all this, you made me
reveal what you wanted to know.  Even after I became suspicious, I
found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman.  But,
you know, I have been trained as an actress myself.  Male costume is
nothing new to me.  I often take advantage of the freedom which it
gives.  I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ran upstairs, got
into my walking clothes, as I call them, and came down just as you
departed.

"Well, I followed you to the door, and so made sure that I was really
an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. Sherlock Holmes.  Then I,
rather imprudently, wished you good-night, and started for the Temple
to see my husband.

"We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued by so
formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest empty when you
call to-morrow.  As to the photograph, your client may rest in peace.
I love and am loved by a better man than he.  The king may do what he
will without hindrance from one whom he has cruelly wronged.  I keep
it only to safeguard myself, and preserve a weapon which will always
secure me from any steps which he might take in the future.  I leave
a photograph which he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr.
Sherlock Holmes, very truly yours,

"IRENE NORTON, _nee_ ADLER."


"What a woman--oh, what a woman!" cried the King of Bohemia, when we
had all three read this epistle.  "Did I not tell you how quick and
resolute she was?  Would she not have made an admirable queen?  Is it
not a pity that she was not on my level?"

"From what I have seen of the lady, she seems, indeed, to be on a
very different level to your majesty," said Holmes, coldly.  "I am
sorry that I have not been able to bring your majesty's business to a
more successful conclusion."

"On the contrary, my dear sir," cried the king, "nothing could be
more successful.  I know that her word is inviolate.  The photograph
is now as safe as if it were in the fire."

"I am glad to hear your majesty say so."

"I am immensely indebted to you.  Pray tell me in what way I can
reward you.  This ring--"  He slipped an emerald snake ring from his
finger, and held it out upon the palm of his hand.

"Your majesty has something which I should value even more highly,"
said Holmes.

"You have but to name it."

"This photograph!"

The king stared at him in amazement.

"Irene's photograph!" he cried.  "Certainly, if you wish it."

"I thank your majesty.  Then there is no more to be done in the
matter.  I have the honor to wish you a very good-morning."  He
bowed, and, turning away without observing the hand which the king
had stretched out to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.

And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom of
Bohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten by
a woman's wit.  He used to make merry over the cleverness of women,
but I have not heard him do it of late.  And when he speaks of Irene
Adler, or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the
honorable title of _the_ woman.




THE DOCTOR, HIS WIFE, AND THE CLOCK

BY ANNA KATHARINE GREEN

_Anna Katharine Green (Rohlfs), whose name is firmly linked in the
public mind with "The Leavenworth Case," is recognized as the
foremost American writer of detective stories.  Of these, Mrs. Rohlfs
considers "The Doctor, His Wife, and the Clock" her most successful
effort in the short story form.  Additional interest arises from the
fact that the scene is laid in those historic old buildings in
Lafayette Place opposite the Astor Library, known as "the Colonnade
Row," in which lived John Jacob Astor and other rich merchants two
generations ago._



THE DOCTOR, HIS WIFE, AND THE CLOCK

By ANNA KATHARINE GREEN

(MRS. CHARLES ROHLFS)


I

On the 17th of July, 1851, a tragedy of no little interest occurred
in one of the residences of the Colonnade in Lafayette Place.

Mr. Hasbrouck, a well-known and highly respected citizen, was
attacked in his room by an unknown assailant, and shot dead before
assistance could reach him.  His murderer escaped, and the problem
offered to the police was, how to identify this person who, by some
happy chance or by the exercise of the most remarkable forethought,
had left no traces behind him, or any clue by which he could be
followed.

The affair was given to a young man, named Ebenezer Gryce, to
investigate, and the story, as he tells it, is this:


When, some time after midnight, I reached Lafayette Place, I found
the block lighted from end to end.  Groups of excited men and women
peered from the open doorways, and mingled their shadows with those
of the huge pillars which adorn the front of this picturesque block
of dwellings.

The house in which the crime had been committed was near the centre
of the row, and, long before I reached it, I had learned from more
than one source that the alarm was first given to the street by a
woman's shriek, and secondly by the shouts of an old man-servant who
had appeared, in a half-dressed condition, at the window of Mr.
Hasbrouck's room, crying, "Murder! murder!"

But when I had crossed the threshold, I was astonished at the paucity
of the facts to be gleaned from the inmates themselves.  The old
servitor, who was the first to talk, had only this account of the
crime to give.

The family, which consisted of Mr. Hasbrouck, his wife, and three
servants, had retired for the night at the usual hour and under the
usual auspices.  At eleven o'clock the lights were all extinguished,
and the whole household asleep, with the possible exception of Mr.
Hasbrouck himself, who, being a man of large business
responsibilities, was frequently troubled with insomnia.

Suddenly Mrs. Hasbrouck woke with a start.  Had she dreamed the words
that were ringing in her ears, or had they been actually uttered in
her hearing?  They were short, sharp words, full of terror and
menace, and she had nearly satisfied herself that she had imagined
them, when there came, from somewhere near the door, a sound she
neither understood nor could interpret, but which filled her with
inexplicable terror, and made her afraid to breathe, or even to
stretch forth her hand toward her husband, whom she supposed to be
sleeping at her side.  At length another strange sound, which she was
sure was not due to her imagination, drove her to make an attempt to
rouse him, when she was horrified to find that she was alone in the
bed, and her husband nowhere within reach.

Filled now with something more than nervous apprehension, she flung
herself to the floor, and tried to penetrate, with frenzied glances,
the surrounding darkness.  But the blinds and shutters both having
been carefully closed by Mr. Hasbrouck before retiring, she found
this impossible, and she was about to sink in terror to the floor,
when she heard a low gasp on the other side of the room, followed by
the suppressed cry:

"God! what have I done!"

The voice was a strange one, but before the fear aroused by this fact
could culminate in a shriek of dismay, she caught the sound of
retreating footsteps, and, eagerly listening, she heard them descend
the stairs and depart by the front door.

Had she known what had occurred--had there been no doubt in her mind
as to what lay in the darkness on the other side of the room--it is
likely that, at the noise caused by the closing front door, she would
have made at once for the balcony that opened out from the window
before which she was standing, and taken one look at the flying
figure below.  But her uncertainty as to what lay hidden from her by
the darkness chained her feet to the floor, and there is no knowing
when she would have moved, if a carriage had not at that moment
passed down Astor Place, bringing with it a sense of companionship
which broke the spell that held her, and gave her strength to light
the gas, which was in ready reach of her hand.

As the sudden blaze illuminated the room, revealing in a burst the
old familiar walls and well-known pieces of furniture, she felt for a
moment as if released from some heavy nightmare and restored to the
common experiences of life.  But in another instant her former dread
returned, and she found herself quaking at the prospect of passing
around the foot of the bed into that part of the room which was as
yet hidden from her eyes.

But the desperation which comes with great crises finally drove her
from her retreat; and, creeping slowly forward, she cast one glance
at the floor before her, when she found her worst fears realized by
the sight of the dead body of her husband lying prone before the open
doorway, with a bullet-hole in his forehead.

Her first impulse was to shriek, but, by a powerful exercise of will,
she checked herself, and, ringing frantically for the servants who
slept on the top floor of the house, flew to the nearest window and
endeavored to open it.  But the shutters had been bolted so securely
by Mr. Hasbrouck, in his endeavor to shut out light and sound, that
by the time she had succeeded in unfastening them, all trace of the
flying murderer had vanished from the street.

Sick with grief and terror, she stepped back into the room just as
the three frightened servants descended the stairs.  As they appeared
in the open doorway, she pointed at her husband's inanimate form, and
then, as if suddenly realizing in its full force the calamity which
had befallen her, she threw up her arms, and sank forward to the
floor in a dead faint.

The two women rushed to her assistance, but the old butler, bounding
over the bed, sprang to the window, and shrieked his alarm to the
street.

In the interim that followed, Mrs. Hasbrouck was revived, and the
master's body laid decently on the bed; but no pursuit was made, nor
any inquiries started likely to assist me in establishing the
identity of the assailant.

Indeed, every one, both in the house and out, seemed dazed by the
unexpected catastrophe, and as no one had any suspicions to offer as
to the probable murderer, I had a difficult task before me.

I began, in the usual way, by inspecting the scene of the murder.  I
found nothing in the room, or in the condition of the body itself,
which added an iota to the knowledge already obtained.  That Mr.
Hasbrouck had been in bed; that he had risen upon hearing a noise;
and that he had been shot before reaching the door, were self-evident
facts.  But there was nothing to guide me further.  The very
simplicity of the circumstances caused a dearth of clues, which made
the difficulty of procedure as great as any I ever encountered.

My search through the hall and down the stairs elicited nothing; and
an investigation of the bolts and bars by which the house was
secured, assured me that the assassin had either entered by the front
door, or had already been secreted in the house when it was locked up
for the night.

"I shall have to trouble Mrs. Hasbrouck for a short interview," I
hereupon announced to the trembling old servitor, who had followed me
like a dog about the house.

He made no demur, and in a few minutes I was ushered into the
presence of the newly made widow, who sat quite alone, in a large
chamber in the rear.  As I crossed the threshold she looked up, and I
encountered a good plain face, without the shadow of guile in it.

"Madam," said I, "I have not come to disturb you.  I will ask two or
three questions only, and then leave you to your grief.  I am told
that some words came from the assassin before he delivered his fatal
shot.  Did you hear these distinctly enough to tell me what they
were?"

"I was sound asleep," said she, "and dreamt, as I thought, that a
fierce, strange voice cried somewhere to some one: 'Ah! you did not
expect me!'  But I dare not say that these words were really uttered
to my husband, for he was not the man to call forth hate, and only a
man in the extremity of passion could address such an exclamation in
such a tone as rings in my memory in connection with the fatal shot
which woke me."

"But that shot was not the work of a friend," I argued.  "If, as
these words seem to prove, the assassin had some other motive than
gain in his assault, then your husband had an enemy, though you never
suspected it."

"Impossible!" was her steady reply, uttered in the most convincing
tone.  "The man who shot him was a common burglar, and, frightened at
having been betrayed into murder, fled without looking for booty.  I
am sure I heard him cry out in terror and remorse: 'God! what have I
done!'"

"Was that before you left the side of the bed?"

"Yes; I did not move from my place till I heard the front door close.
I was paralyzed by my fear and dread."

"Are you in the habit of trusting to the security of a latch-lock
only in the fastening of your front door at night?  I am told that
the big key was not in the lock, and that the bolt at the bottom of
the door was not drawn."

"The bolt at the bottom of the door is never drawn.  Mr. Hasbrouck
was so good a man he never mistrusted any one.  That is why the big
lock was not fastened.  The key, not working well, he took it some
days ago to the locksmith, and when the latter failed to return it,
he laughed, and said he thought no one would ever think of meddling
with his front door."

"Is there more than one night-key to your house?" I now asked.

She shook her head.

"And when did Mr. Hasbrouck last use his?"

"To-night, when he came home from prayer-meeting," she answered, and
burst into tears.

Her grief was so real and her loss so recent that I hesitated to
afflict her by further questions.  So returning to the scene of the
tragedy, I stepped out upon the balcony which ran in front.  Soft
voices instantly struck my ears.  The neighbors on either side were
grouped in front of their own windows, and were exchanging the
remarks natural under the circumstances.  I paused, as in duty bound,
and listened.  But I heard nothing worth recording, and would have
instantly reentered the house, if I had not been impressed by the
appearance of a very graceful woman who stood at my right.  She was
clinging to her husband, who was gazing at one of the pillars before
him in a strange, fixed way which astonished me till he attempted to
move, and then I saw that he was blind.  Instantly I remembered that
there lived in this row a blind doctor, equally celebrated for his
skill and for his uncommon personal attractions, and, greatly
interested not only in his affliction, but in the sympathy evinced
for him by his young and affectionate wife, I stood still till I
heard her say in the soft and appealing tones of love:

"Come in, Constant; you have heavy duties for to-morrow, and you
should get a few hours' rest, if possible."

He came from the shadow of the pillar, and for one minute I saw his
face with the lamplight shining full upon it.  It was as regular of
feature as a sculptured Adonis, and it was as white.

"Sleep!" he repeated, in the measured tones of deep but suppressed
feeling.  "Sleep! with murder on the other side of the wall!"  And he
stretched out his arms in a dazed way that insensibly accentuated the
horror I myself felt of the crime which had so lately taken place in
the room behind me.

She, noting the movement, took one of the groping hands in her own
and drew him gently toward her.

"This way," she urged; and, guiding him into the house, she closed
the window and drew down the shades, making the street seem darker by
the loss of her exquisite presence.

This may seem a digression, but I was at the time a young man of
thirty, and much under the dominion of woman's beauty.  I was
therefore slow in leaving the balcony, and persistent in my wish to
learn something of this remarkable couple before leaving Mr.
Hasbrouck's house.

The story told me was very simple.  Dr. Zabriskie had not been born
blind, but had become so after a grievous illness which had stricken
him down soon after he received his diploma.  Instead of succumbing
to an affliction which would have daunted most men, he expressed his
intention of practising his profession, and soon became so successful
in it that he found no difficulty in establishing himself in one of
the best paying quarters of the city.  Indeed, his intuition seemed
to have developed in a remarkable degree after his loss of sight, and
he seldom, if ever, made a mistake in diagnosis.  Considering this
fact, and the personal attractions which gave him distinction, it was
no wonder that he soon became a popular physician whose presence was
a benefaction and whose word a law.

He had been engaged to be married at the time of his illness, and,
when he learned what was likely to be its results, had offered to
release the young lady from all obligation to him.  But she would not
be released, and they were married.  This had taken place some five
years previous to Mr. Hasbrouck's death, three of which had been
spent by them in Lafayette Place.

So much for the beautiful woman next door.

There being absolutely no clue to the assailant of Mr. Hasbrouck, I
naturally looked forward to the inquest for some evidence upon which
to work.  But there seemed to be no underlying facts to this tragedy.
The most careful study into the habits and conduct of the deceased
brought nothing to light save his general beneficence and rectitude,
nor was there in his history or in that of his wife any secret or
hidden obligation calculated to provoke any such act of revenge as
murder.  Mrs. Hasbrouck's surmise that the intruder was simply a
burglar, and that she had rather imagined than heard the words that
pointed to the shooting as a deed of vengeance, soon gained general
credence.  But, though the police worked long and arduously in this
new direction, their efforts were without fruit, and the case bade
fair to remain an unsolvable mystery.

But the deeper the mystery the more persistently does my mind cling
to it, and some five months after the matter had been delegated to
oblivion, I found myself starting suddenly from sleep, with these
words ringing in my ears:

"_Who uttered the scream that gave the first alarm of Mr. Hasbrouck's
violent death?_"

I was in such a state of excitement that the perspiration stood out
on my forehead.  Mrs. Hasbrouck's story of the occurrence returned to
me, and I remembered as distinctly as if she were then speaking, that
she had expressly stated that she did not scream when confronted by
the sight of her husband's dead body.  But some one had screamed, and
that very loudly.  Who was it, then?  One of the maids, startled by
the sudden summons from below, or some one else--some involuntary
witness of the crime, whose testimony had been suppressed at the
inquest, by fear or influence?

The possibility of having come upon a clue even at this late day, so
fired my ambition, that I took the first opportunity of revisiting
Lafayette Place.  Choosing such persons as I thought most open to my
questions, I learned that there were many who could testify to having
heard a woman's shrill scream on that memorable night just prior to
the alarm given by old Cyrus, but no one who could tell from whose
lips it had come.  One fact, however, was immediately settled.  It
had not been the result of the servant-women's fears.  Both of the
girls were positive that they had uttered no sound, nor had they
themselves heard any, till Cyrus rushed to the window with his wild
cries.  As the scream, by whomever given, was uttered before they
descended the stairs, I was convinced by these assurances that it had
issued from one of the front windows, and not from the rear of the
house, where their own rooms lay.  Could it be that it had sprung
from the adjoining dwelling, and that--  My thoughts went no further,
but I made up my mind to visit the Doctor's house at once.

It took some courage to do this, for the Doctor's wife had attended
the inquest, and her beauty, seen in broad daylight, had worn such an
aspect of mingled sweetness and dignity, that I hesitated to
encounter it under any circumstances likely to disturb its pure
serenity.  But a clue, once grasped, can not be lightly set aside by
a true detective, and it would have taken more than a woman's frown
to stop me at this point.  So I rang Dr. Zabriskie's bell.

I am seventy years old now and am no longer daunted by the charms of
a beautiful woman, but I confess that when I found myself in the fine
reception parlor on the first floor, I experienced no little
trepidation at the prospect of the interview which awaited me.

But as soon as the fine commanding form of the Doctor's wife crossed
the threshold, I recovered my senses and surveyed her with as direct
a gaze as my position allowed.  For her aspect bespoke a degree of
emotion that astonished me; and even before I spoke I perceived her
to be trembling, though she was a woman of no little natural dignity
and self-possession.

"I seem to know your face," she said, advancing courteously toward
me, "but your name"--and here she glanced at the card she held in her
hand--"is totally unfamiliar to me."

"I think you saw me some eighteen months ago," said I.  "I am the
detective who gave testimony at the inquest which was held over the
remains of Mr. Hasbrouck."

I had not meant to startle her, but at this introduction of myself I
saw her naturally pale cheek turn paler, and her fine eyes, which had
been fixed curiously upon me, gradually sink to the floor.

"Great heaven!" thought I, "what is this I have stumbled upon!"

"I do not understand what business you can have with me," she
presently remarked, with a show of gentle indifference that did not
in the least deceive me.

"I do not wonder," I rejoined.  "The crime which took place next door
is almost forgotten by the community, and even if it were not, I am
sure you would find it difficult to conjecture the nature of the
question I have to put to you."

"I am surprised," she began, rising in her involuntary emotion and
thereby compelling me to rise also.  "How can you have any question
to ask me on this subject?  Yet if you have," she continued, with a
rapid change of manner that touched my heart in spite of myself, "I
shall, of course, do my best to answer you."

There are women whose sweetest tones and most charming smiles only
serve to awaken distrust in men of my calling; but Mrs. Zabriskie was
not of this number.  Her face was beautiful, but it was also candid
in its expression, and beneath the agitation which palpably disturbed
her, I was sure there lurked nothing either wicked or false.  Yet I
held fast by the clue which I had grasped, as it were, in the dark,
and without knowing whither I was tending, much less whither I was
leading her, I proceeded to say:

"The question which I presume to put to you as the next-door neighbor
of Mr. Hasbrouck, is this: Who was the woman who screamed out so
loudly that the whole neighborhood heard her on the night of that
gentleman's assassination?"

The gasp she gave answered my question in a way she little realized,
and, struck as I was by the impalpable links that had led me to the
threshold of this hitherto unsolvable mystery, I was about to press
my advantage and ask another question, when she quickly started
forward and laid her hand on my lips.

Astonished, I looked at her inquiringly, but her head was turned
aside, and her eyes, fixed upon the door, showed the greatest
anxiety.  Instantly I realized what she feared.  Her husband was
entering the house, and she dreaded lest his ears should catch a word
of our conversation.

Not knowing what was in her mind, and unable to realize the
importance of the moment to her, I yet listened to the advance of her
blind husband with an almost painful interest.  Would he enter the
room where we were, or would he pass immediately to his office in the
rear?  She seemed to wonder too, and almost held her breath as he
neared the door, paused, and stood in the open doorway, with his ear
turned toward us.

As for myself, I remained perfectly still, gazing at his face in
mingled surprise and apprehension.  For besides its beauty, which was
of a marked order, as I have already observed, it had a touching
expression which irresistibly aroused both pity and interest in the
spectator.  This may have been the result of his affliction, or it
may have sprung from some deeper cause; but, whatever its source,
this look in his face produced a strong impression upon me and
interested me at once in his personality.  Would he enter?  Or would
he pass on?  Her look of silent appeal showed me in which direction
her wishes lay, but while I answered her glance by complete silence,
I was conscious in some indistinct way that the business I had
undertaken would be better furthered by his entrance.

The blind have been often said to possess a sixth sense in place of
the one they have lost.  Though I am sure we made no noise, I soon
perceived that he was aware of our presence.  Stepping hastily
forward, he said, in the high and vibrating tone of restrained
passion:

"Helen, are you here?"

For a moment I thought she did not mean to answer, but knowing
doubtless from experience the impossibility of deceiving him, she
answered with a cheerful assent, dropping her hand as she did so from
before my lips.

He heard the slight rustle which accompanied the movement, and a look
I found it hard to comprehend flashed over his features, altering his
expression so completely that he seemed another man.

"You have some one with you," he declared, advancing another step but
with none of the uncertainty which usually accompanies the movements
of the blind.  "Some dear friend," he went on, with an almost
sarcastic emphasis and a forced smile that had little of gaiety in it.

The agitated and distressed blush which answered him could have but
one interpretation.  He suspected that her hand had been clasped in
mine, and she perceived his thought and knew that I perceived it also.

Drawing herself up, she moved toward him, saying in a sweet, womanly
tone that to me spoke volumes:

"It is no friend, Constant, not even an acquaintance.  The person
whom I now present to you is an agent from the police.  He is here
upon a trivial errand which will be soon finished, when I will join
you in your office."

I knew she was but taking a choice between two evils.  That she would
have saved her husband the knowledge of a detective's presence in the
house, if her self-respect would have allowed it, but neither she nor
I anticipated the effect which this presentation produced upon him.

"A police officer," he repeated, staring with his sightless eyes, as
if, in his eagerness to see, he half hoped his lost sense would
return.  "He can have no trivial errand here; he has been sent by God
Himself to--"

"Let me speak for you," hastily interposed his wife, springing to his
side and clasping his arm with a fervor that was equally expressive
of appeal and command.  Then turning to me, she explained: "Since Mr.
Hasbrouck's unaccountable death, my husband has been laboring under a
hallucination which I have only to mention for you to recognize its
perfect absurdity.  He thinks--oh! do not look like that, Constant;
you know it is a hallucination which must vanish the moment we drag
it into broad daylight--that he--_he_, the best man in all the world,
was himself the assailant of Mr. Hasbrouck."

Good God!

"I say nothing of the impossibility of this being so," she went on in
a fever of expostulation.  "He is blind, and could not have delivered
such a shot even if he had desired to; besides, he had no weapon.
But the inconsistency of the thing speaks for itself, and should
assure him that his mind is unbalanced and that he is merely
suffering from a shock that was greater than we realized.  He is a
physician and has had many such instances in his own practise.  Why,
he was very much attached to Mr. Hasbrouck!  They were the best of
friends, and though he insists that he killed him, he can not give
any reason for the deed."

At these words the Doctor's face grew stern, and he spoke like an
automaton repeating some fearful lesson.

"I killed him.  I went to his room and deliberately shot him.  I had
nothing against him, and my remorse is extreme.  Arrest me, and let
me pay the penalty of my crime.  It is the only way in which I can
obtain peace."

Shocked beyond all power of self-control by this repetition of what
she evidently considered the unhappy ravings of a madman, she let go
his arm and turned upon me in frenzy.

"Convince him!" she cried.  "Convince him by your questions that he
never could have done this fearful thing."

I was laboring under great excitement myself, for I felt my youth
against me in a matter of such tragic consequence.  Besides, I agreed
with her that he was in a distempered state of mind, and I hardly
knew how to deal with one so fixed in his hallucination and with so
much intelligence to support it.  But the emergency was great, for he
was holding out his wrists in the evident expectation of my taking
him into instant custody; and the sight was killing his wife, who had
sunk on the floor between us, in terror and anguish.

"You say you killed Mr. Hasbrouck," I began.  "Where did you get your
pistol, and what did you do with it after you left his house?"

"My husband had no pistol; never had any pistol," put in Mrs.
Zabriskie, with vehement assertion.  "If I had seen him with such a
weapon--"

"I threw it away.  When I left the house, I cast it as far from me as
possible, for I was frightened at what I had done, horribly
frightened."

"No pistol was ever found," I answered, with a smile, forgetting for
the moment that he could not see.  "If such an instrument had been
found in the street after a murder of such consequence it certainly
would have been brought to the police."

"You forget that a good pistol is valuable property," he went on
stolidly.  "Some one came along before the general alarm was given;
and seeing such a treasure lying on the sidewalk, picked it up and
carried it off.  Not being an honest man, he preferred to keep it to
drawing the attention of the police upon himself."

"Hum, perhaps," said I; "but where did you get it.  Surely you can
tell where you procured such a weapon, if, as your wife intimates,
you did not own one."

"I bought it that self-same night of a friend; a friend whom I will
not name, since he resides no longer in this country.  I--"  He
paused; intense passion was in his face; he turned toward his wife,
and a low cry escaped him, which made her look up in fear.

"I do not wish to go into any particulars," said he.  "God forsook me
and I committed a horrible crime.  When I am punished, perhaps peace
will return to me and happiness to her.  I would not wish her to
suffer too long or too bitterly for my sin."

"Constant!"  What love was in the cry! and what despair!  It seemed
to move him and turn his thoughts for a moment into a different
channel.

"Poor child!" he murmured, stretching out his hands by an
irresistible impulse toward her.  But the change was but momentary,
and he was soon again the stern and determined self-accuser.  "Are
you going to take me before a magistrate?" he asked.  "If so, I have
a few duties to perform which you are welcome to witness."

"I have no warrant," I said; "besides, I am scarcely the one to take
such a responsibility upon myself.  If, however, you persist in your
declaration, I will communicate with my superiors, who will take such
action as they think best."

"That will be still more satisfactory to me," said he; "for though I
have many times contemplated giving myself up to the authorities, I
have still much to do before I can leave my home and practise without
injury to others.  Good-day; when you want me, you will find me here."

He was gone, and the poor young wife was left crouching on the floor
alone.  Pitying her shame and terror, I ventured to remark that it
was not an uncommon thing for a man to confess to a crime he had
never committed, and assured her that the matter would be inquired
into very carefully before any attempt was made upon his liberty.

She thanked me, and, slowly rising, tried to regain her equanimity;
but the manner as well as the matter of her husband's
self-condemnation was too overwhelming in its nature for her to
recover readily from her emotions.

"I have long dreaded this," she acknowledged.  "For months I have
foreseen that he would make some rash communication or insane avowal.
If I had dared, I would have consulted some physician about this
hallucination of his; but he was so sane on other points that I
hesitated to give my dreadful secret to the world.  I kept hoping
that time and his daily pursuits would have their effect and restore
him to himself.  But his illusion grows, and now I fear that nothing
will ever convince him that he did not commit the deed of which he
accuses himself.  If he were not blind I would have more hope, but
the blind have so much time for brooding."

"I think he had better be indulged in his fancies for the present," I
ventured.  "If he is laboring under an illusion it might be dangerous
to cross him."

"_If?_" she echoed in an indescribable tone of amazement and dread.
"Can you for a moment harbor the idea that he has spoken the truth?"

"Madam," I returned, with something of the cynicism of my later
years, "what caused you to give such an unearthly scream just before
this murder was made known to the neighborhood?"

She stared, paled, and finally began to tremble, not, as I now
believe, at the insinuation latent in my words, but at the doubts
which my question aroused in her own breast.

"Did I?" she asked; then with a great burst of candor, which seemed
inseparable from her nature, she continued: "Why do I try to mislead
you or deceive myself?  I did give a shriek just before the alarm was
raised next door; but it was not from any knowledge I had of a crime
having been committed, but because I unexpectedly saw before me my
husband whom I supposed to be on his way to Poughkeepsie.  He was
looking very pale and strange, and for a moment I thought I was
beholding his ghost.  But he soon explained his appearance by saying
that he had fallen from the train and had been only saved by a
miracle from being dismembered; and I was just bemoaning his mishap
and trying to calm him and myself, when that terrible shout was heard
next door of 'Murder! murder!'  Coming so soon after the shock he had
himself experienced, it quite unnerved him, and I think we can date
his mental disturbance from that moment.  For he began almost
immediately to take a morbid interest in the affair next door, though
it was weeks, if not months, before he let a word fall of the nature
of those you have just heard.  Indeed it was not till I repeated to
him some of the expressions he was continually letting fall in his
sleep, that he commenced to accuse himself of crime and talk of
retribution."

"You say that your husband frightened you on that night by appearing
suddenly at the door when you thought him on his way to Poughkeepsie.
Is Dr. Zabriskie in the habit of thus going and coming alone at an
hour so late as this must have been?"

"You forget that to the blind, night is less full of perils than the
day.  Often and often has my husband found his way to his patients'
houses alone after midnight; but on this especial evening he had
Harry with him.  Harry was his driver, and always accompanied him
when he went any distance."

"Well, then," said I, "all we have to do is to summon Harry and hear
what he has to say concerning this affair.  He surely will know
whether or not his master went into the house next door."

"Harry has left us," she said.  "Dr. Zabriskie has another driver
now.  Besides--(I have nothing to conceal from you)--Harry was not
with him when he returned to the house that evening, or the Doctor
would not have been without his portmanteau till the next day.
Something--I have never known what--caused them to separate, and that
is why I have no answer to give the Doctor when he accuses himself of
committing a deed on that night which is wholly out of keeping with
every other act of his life."

"And have you never questioned Harry why they separated and why he
allowed his master to come home alone after the shock he had received
at the station?"

"I did not know there was any reason for doing so till long after he
left us."

"And when did he leave?"

"That I do not remember.  A few weeks, or possibly a few days, after
that dreadful night."

"And where is he now?"

"Ah, that I have not the least means of knowing.  But," she suddenly
cried, "what do you want of Harry?  If he did not follow Dr.
Zabriskie to his own door, he could tell us nothing that would
convince my husband that he is laboring under an illusion."

"But he might tell us something which would convince us that Dr.
Zabriskie was not himself after the accident that he--"

"Hush!" came from her lips in imperious tones.  "I will not believe
that he shot Mr. Hasbrouck even if you prove him to have been insane
at the time.  How could he?  My husband is blind.  It would take a
man of very keen sight to force himself into a house that was closed
for the night, and kill a man in the dark at one shot."

"Rather," cried a voice from the doorway, "it is only a blind man who
could do this.  Those who trust to eyesight must be able to catch
some glimpse of the mark they aim at, and this room, as I have been
told, was without a glimmer of light.  But the blind trust to sound,
and as Mr. Hasbrouck spoke--"

"Oh!" burst from the horrified wife, "is there no one to stop him
when he speaks like that?"



II

When I related to my superiors the details of the foregoing
interview, two of them coincided with the wife in thinking that Dr.
Zabriskie was in an irresponsible condition of mind which made any
statement of his questionable.  But the third seemed disposed to
argue the matter, and, casting me an inquiring look, seemed to ask
what my opinion was on the subject.  Answering him as if he had
spoken, I gave my conclusion as follows: That whether insane or not,
Dr. Zabriskie had fired the shot which terminated Mr. Hasbrouck's
life.

It was the Inspector's own idea, but it was not shared in by the
others, one of whom had known the Doctor for years.  Accordingly they
compromised by postponing all opinion till they had themselves
interrogated the Doctor, and I was detailed to bring him before them
the next afternoon.

He came without reluctance, his wife accompanying him.  In the short
time which elapsed between their leaving Lafayette Place and entering
Headquarters, I embraced the opportunity of observing them, and I
found the study equally exciting and interesting.  His face was calm
but hopeless, and his eye, which should have shown a wild glimmer if
there was truth in his wife's hypothesis, was dark and unfathomable,
but neither frenzied nor uncertain.  He spake but once and listened
to nothing, though now and then his wife moved as if to attract his
attention, and once even stole her hand toward his, in the tender
hope that he would feel its approach and accept her sympathy.  But he
was deaf as well as blind; and sat wrapped up in thoughts which she,
I know, would have given worlds to penetrate.

Her countenance was not without its mystery also.  She showed in
every lineament passionate concern and misery, and a deep tenderness
from which the element of fear was not absent.  But she, as well as
he, betrayed that some misunderstanding, deeper than any I had
previously suspected, drew its intangible veil between them and made
the near proximity in which they sat, at once a heart-piercing
delight and an unspeakable pain.  What was this misunderstanding? and
what was the character of the fear that modified her every look of
love in his direction?  Her perfect indifference to my presence
proved that it was not connected with the position in which he had
put himself toward the police by his voluntary confession of crime,
nor could I thus interpret the expression of frantic question which
now and then contracted her features, as she raised her eyes toward
his sightless orbs, and strove to read, in his firm-set lips, the
meaning of those assertions she could only ascribe to a loss of
reason.

The stopping of the carriage seemed to awaken both from thoughts that
separated rather than united them.  He turned his face in her
direction, and she, stretching forth her hand, prepared to lead him
from the carriage, without any of that display of timidity which had
been previously evident in her manner.

As his guide she seemed to fear nothing; as his lover, everything.

"There is another and a deeper tragedy underlying the outward and
obvious one," was my inward conclusion, as I followed them into the
presence of the gentlemen awaiting them.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

Dr. Zabriskie's appearance was a shock to those who knew him; so was
his manner, which was calm, straightforward, and quietly determined.

"I shot Mr. Hasbrouck," was his steady affirmation, given without any
show of frenzy or desperation.  "If you ask me why I did it, I can
not answer; if you ask me how, I am ready to state all that I know
concerning the matter."

"But, Dr. Zabriskie," interposed his friend, "the why is the most
important thing for us to consider just now.  If you really desire to
convince us that you committed the dreadful crime of killing a
totally inoffensive man, you should give us some reason for an act so
opposed to all your instincts and general conduct."

But the Doctor continued unmoved:

"I had no reason for murdering Mr. Hasbrouck.  A hundred questions
can elicit no other reply; you had better keep to the how."

A deep-drawn breath from the wife answered the looks of the three
gentlemen to whom this suggestion was offered.  "You see," that
breath seemed to protest, "that he is not in his right mind."

I began to waver in my own opinion, and yet the intuition which has
served me in cases as seemingly impenetrable as this bade me beware
of following the general judgment.

"Ask him to inform you how he got into the house," I whispered to
Inspector D----, who sat nearest me.

Immediately the Inspector put the question I had suggested:

"By what means did you enter Mr. Hasbrouck's house at so late an hour
as this murder occurred?"

The blind doctor's head fell forward on his breast, and he hesitated
for the first and only time.

"You will not believe me," said he; "but the door was ajar when I
came to it.  Such things make crime easy; it is the only excuse I
have to offer for this dreadful deed."

The front door of a respectable citizen's house ajar at half-past
eleven at night.  It was a statement that fixed in all minds the
conviction of the speaker's irresponsibility.  Mrs. Zabriskie's brow
cleared, and her beauty became for a moment dazzling as she held out
her hands in irrepressible relief toward those who were interrogating
her husband.  I alone kept my impassibility.  A possible explanation
of this crime had flashed like lightning across my mind; an
explanation from which I inwardly recoiled, even while I was forced
to consider it.

"Dr. Zabriskie," remarked the Inspector who was most friendly to him,
"such old servants as those kept by Mr. Hasbrouck do not leave the
front door ajar at twelve o'clock at night."

"Yet ajar it was," repeated the blind doctor, with quiet emphasis;
"and finding it so, I went in.  When I came out again, I closed it.
Do you wish me to swear to what I say?  If so, I am ready."

What could we reply?  To see this splendid-looking man, hallowed by
an affliction so great that in itself it called forth the compassion
of the most indifferent, accusing himself of a cold-blooded crime, in
tones that sounded dispassionate because of the will that forced
their utterance, was too painful in itself for us to indulge in any
unnecessary words.  Compassion took the place of curiosity, and each
and all of us turned involuntary looks of pity upon the young wife
pressing so eagerly to his side.

"For a blind man," ventured one, "the assault was both deft and
certain.  Are you accustomed to Mr. Hasbrouck's house, that you found
your way with so little difficulty to his bedroom?"

"I am accustomed--" he began.

But here his wife broke in with irrepressible passion:

"He is not accustomed to that house.  He has never been beyond the
first floor.  Why, why do you question him?  Do you not see--"

His hand was on her lips.

"Hush!" he commanded.  "You know my skill in moving about a house;
how I sometimes deceive those who do not know me into believing that
I can see, by the readiness with which I avoid obstacles and find my
way even in strange and untried scenes.  Do not try to make them
think I am not in my right mind, or you will drive me into the very
condition you deprecate."

His face, rigid, cold, and set, looked like that of a mask.  Hers,
drawn with horror and filled with question that was fast taking the
form of doubt, bespoke an awful tragedy from which more than one of
us recoiled.

"Can you shoot a man dead without seeing him?" asked the
Superintendent, with painful effort.

"Give me a pistol and I will show you," was the quick reply.

A low cry came from the wife.  In a drawer near to every one of us
there lay a pistol, but no one moved to take it out.  There was a
look in the Doctor's eye which made us fear to trust him with a
pistol just then.

"We will accept your assurance that you possess a skill beyond that
of most men," returned the Superintendent.  And beckoning me forward,
he whispered: "This is a case for the doctors and not for the police.
Remove him quietly, and notify Dr. Southyard of what I say."

But Dr. Zabriskie, who seemed to have an almost supernatural
acuteness of hearing, gave a violent start at this and spoke up for
the first time with real passion in his voice:

"No, no, I pray you.  I can bear anything but that.  Remember,
gentlemen, that I am blind; that I can not see who is about me; that
my life would be a torture if I felt myself surrounded by spies
watching to catch some evidence of madness in me.  Rather conviction
at once, death, dishonor, and obloquy.  These I have incurred.  These
I have brought upon myself by crime, but not this worse fate--oh! not
this worse fate."

His passion was so intense and yet so confined within the bounds of
decorum that we felt strangely impressed by it.  Only the wife stood
transfixed, with the dread growing in her heart, till her white,
waxen visage seemed even more terrible to contemplate than his
passion-distorted one.

"It is not strange that my wife thinks me demented," the Doctor
continued, as if afraid of the silence that answered him.  "But it is
your business to discriminate, and you should know a sane man when
you see him."

Inspector D---- no longer hesitated.

"Very well," said he, "give us the least proof that your assertions
are true, and we will lay your case before the prosecuting attorney."

"Proof?  Is not a man's word--"

"No man's confession is worth much without some evidence to support
it.  In your case there is none.  You can not even produce the pistol
with which you assert yourself to have committed the deed."

"True, true.  I was frightened by what I had done, and the instinct
of self-preservation led me to rid myself of the weapon in any way I
could.  But some one found this pistol; some one picked it up from
the sidewalk of Lafayette Place on that fatal night.  Advertise for
it.  Offer a reward.  I will give you the money."  Suddenly he
appeared to realize how all this sounded.  "Alas!" cried he, "I know
the story seems improbable; all I say seems improbable; but it is not
the probable things that happen in this life, but the improbable, as
you should know, who every day dig deep into the heart of human
affairs."

Were these the ravings of insanity?  I began to understand the wife's
terror.

"I bought the pistol," he went on, "of--alas!  I can not tell you his
name.  Everything is against me.  I can not adduce one proof; yet
she, even she, is beginning to fear that my story is true.  I know it
by her silence, a silence that yawns between us like a deep and
unfathomable gulf."

But at these words her voice rang out with passionate vehemence.

"No, no, it is false!  I will never believe that your hands have been
plunged in blood.  You are my own pure-hearted Constant, cold,
perhaps, and stern, but with no guilt upon your conscience, save in
your own wild imagination."

"Helen, you are no friend to me," he declared, pushing her gently
aside.  "Believe me innocent, but say nothing to lead these others to
doubt my word."

And she said no more, but her looks spoke volumes.

The result was that he was not detained, though he prayed for instant
commitment.  He seemed to dread his own home, and the surveillance to
which he instinctively knew he would henceforth be subjected.  To see
him shrink from his wife's hand as she strove to lead him from the
room was sufficiently painful; but the feeling thus aroused was
nothing to that with which we observed the keen and agonized
expectancy of his look as he turned and listened for the steps of the
officer who followed him.

"I shall never again know whether or not I am alone," was his final
observation as he left our presence.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

I said nothing to my superiors of the thoughts I had had while
listening to the above interrogatories.  A theory had presented
itself to my mind which explained in some measure the mysteries of
the Doctor's conduct, but I wished for time and opportunity to test
its reasonableness before submitting it to their higher judgment.
And these seemed likely to be given me, for the Inspectors continued
divided in their opinion of the blind physician's guilt, and the
District-Attorney, when told of the affair, pooh-poohed it without
mercy, and declined to stir in the matter unless some tangible
evidence were forthcoming to substantiate the poor Doctor's
self-accusations.

"If guilty, why does he shrink from giving his motives," said he,
"and if so anxious to go to the gallows, why does he suppress the
very facts calculated to send him there?  He is as mad as a March
hare, and it is to an asylum he should go and not to a jail."

In this conclusion I failed to agree with him, and as time wore on my
suspicions took shape and finally ended in a fixed conviction.  Dr.
Zabriskie had committed the crime he avowed, but--let me proceed a
little further with my story before I reveal what lies beyond that
"but."

Notwithstanding Dr. Zabriskie's almost frenzied appeal for solitude,
a man had been placed in surveillance over him in the shape of a
young doctor skilled in diseases of the brain.  This man communicated
more or less with the police, and one morning I received from him the
following extracts from the diary he had been ordered to keep:


"The Doctor is settling into a deep melancholy from which he tries to
rise at times, but with only indifferent success.  Yesterday he rode
around to all his patients for the purpose of withdrawing his
services on the plea of illness.  But he still keeps his office open,
and to-day I had the opportunity of witnessing his reception and
treatment of the many sufferers who came to him for aid.  I think he
was conscious of my presence, though an attempt had been made to
conceal it.  For the listening look never left his face from the
moment he entered the room, and once he rose and passed quickly from
wall to wall, groping with outstretched hands into every nook and
corner, and barely escaping contact with the curtain behind which I
was hidden.  But if he suspected my presence, he showed no
displeasure at it, wishing perhaps for a witness to his skill in the
treatment of disease.

"And truly I never beheld a finer manifestation of practical insight
in cases of a more or less baffling nature than I beheld in him
to-day.  He is certainly a most wonderful physician, and I feel bound
to record that his mind is as clear for business as if no shadow had
fallen upon it.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"Dr. Zabriskie loves his wife, but in a way that tortures both
himself and her.  If she is gone from the house he is wretched, and
yet when she returns he often forbears to speak to her, or if he does
speak, it is with a constraint that hurts her more than his silence.
I was present when she came in to-day.  Her step, which had been
eager on the stairway, flagged as she approached the room, and he
naturally noted the change and gave his own interpretation to it.
His face, which had been very pale, flushed suddenly, and a nervous
trembling seized him which he sought in vain to hide.  But by the
time her tall and beautiful figure stood in the doorway he was his
usual self again in all but the expression of his eyes, which stared
straight before him in an agony of longing only to be observed in
those who have once seen.

"'Where have you been, Helen?' he asked, as, contrary to his wont, he
moved to meet her.

"'To my mother's, to Arnold & Constable's, and to the hospital, as
you requested,' was her quick answer, made without faltering or
embarrassment.

"He stepped still nearer and took her hand, and as he did so my
physician's eye noted how his finger lay over her pulse in seeming
unconsciousness.

"'Nowhere else?' he queried.

"She smiled the saddest kind of smile and shook her head; then,
remembering that he could not see this movement, she cried in a
wistful tone:

"'Nowhere else, Constant; I was too anxious to get back.'

"I expected him to drop her hand at this, but he did not; and his
finger still rested on her pulse.

"'And whom did you see while you were gone?' he continued.

"She told him, naming over several names.

"'You must have enjoyed yourself,' was his cold comment, as he let go
her hand and turned away.  But his manner showed relief, and I could
not but sympathize with the pitiable situation of a man who found
himself forced to means like these for probing the heart of his young
wife.

"Yet when I turned toward her I realized that her position was but
little happier than his.  Tears are no strangers to her eyes, but
those that welled up at this moment seemed to possess a bitterness
that promised but little peace for her future.  Yet she quickly dried
them and busied herself with ministrations for his comfort.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"If I am any judge of woman, Helen Zabriskie is superior to most of
her sex.  That her husband mistrusts her is evident, but whether this
is the result of the stand she has taken in his regard, or only a
manifestation of dementia, I have as yet been unable to determine.  I
dread to leave them alone together, and yet when I presume to suggest
that she should be on her guard in her interviews with him, she
smiles very placidly and tells me that nothing would give her greater
joy than to see him lift his hand against her, for that would argue
that he is not accountable for his deeds or for his assertions.

"Yet it would be a grief to see her injured by this passionate and
unhappy man.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"You have said that you wanted all details I could give; so I feel
bound to say that Dr. Zabriskie tries to be considerate of his wife,
though he often fails in the attempt.  When she offers herself as his
guide, or assists him with his mail, or performs any of the many acts
of kindness by which she continually manifests her sense of his
affliction, he thanks her with courtesy and often with kindness, yet
I know she would willingly exchange all his set phrases for one fond
embrace or impulsive smile of affection.  That he is not in the full
possession of his faculties would be too much to say, and yet upon
what other hypothesis can we account for the inconsistencies of his
conduct?

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I have before me two visions of mental suffering.  At noon I passed
the office door, and looking within, saw the figure of Dr. Zabriskie
seated in his great chair, lost in thought or deep in those memories
which make an abyss in one's consciousness.  His hands, which were
clenched, rested upon the arms of his chair, and in one of them I
detected a woman's glove, which I had no difficulty in recognizing as
one of the pair worn by his wife this morning.  He held it as a tiger
might hold his prey or a miser his gold, but his set features and
sightless eyes betrayed that a conflict of emotions was waging within
him, among which tenderness had but little share.

"Though alive, as he usually is, to every sound, he was too absorbed
at this moment to notice my presence, though I had taken no pains to
approach quietly.  I therefore stood for a full minute watching him,
till an irresistible sense of the shame of thus spying upon a blind
man in his moments of secret anguish seized upon me and I turned
away.  But not before I saw his features relax in a storm of
passionate feeling, as he rained kisses after kisses on the senseless
kid he had so long held in his motionless grasp.  Yet when an hour
later he entered the dining-room on his wife's arm, there was nothing
in his manner to show that he had in any way changed in his attitude
toward her.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"The other picture was more tragic still.  I have no business with
Mrs. Zabriskie's affairs; but as I passed upstairs to my room an hour
ago, I caught a fleeting vision of her tall form, with the arms
thrown up over her head in a paroxysm of feeling which made her as
oblivious to my presence as her husband had been several hours
before.  Were the words that escaped her lips, 'Thank God we have no
children!' or was this exclamation suggested to me by the passion and
unrestrained impulse of her action?"


Side by side with these lines, I, Ebenezer Gryce, placed the
following extracts from my own diary:


"Watched the Zabriskie mansion for five hours this morning, from the
second story window of an adjoining hotel.  Saw the Doctor when he
drove away on his round of visits, and saw him when he returned.  A
colored man accompanied him.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"To-day I followed Mrs. Zabriskie.  I had a motive for this, the
nature of which I think it wisest not to divulge.  She went first to
a house in Washington Place where I am told her mother lives.  Here
she stayed some time, after which she drove down to Canal Street,
where she did some shopping, and later stopped at the hospital, into
which I took the liberty of following her.  She seemed to know many
there, and passed from cot to cot with a smile in which I alone
discerned the sadness of a broken heart.  When she left, I left also,
without having learned anything beyond the fact that Mrs. Zabriskie
is one who does her duty in sorrow as in happiness.  A rare and
trustworthy woman I should say, and yet her husband does not trust
her.  Why?

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I have spent this day in accumulating details in regard to Dr. and
Mrs. Zabriskie's life previous to the death of Mr. Hasbrouck.  I
learned from sources it would be unwise to quote just here that Mrs.
Zabriskie had not lacked enemies ready to charge her with coquetry;
that while she had never sacrificed her dignity in public, more than
one person had been heard to declare that Dr. Zabriskie was fortunate
in being blind, since the sight of his wife's beauty would have but
poorly compensated him for the pain he would have suffered in seeing
how that beauty was admired.

"That all gossip is more or less tinged with exaggeration I have no
doubt, yet when a name is mentioned in connection with such stories,
there is usually some truth at the bottom of them.  And a name is
mentioned in this case, though I do not think it worth my while to
repeat it here; and loth as I am to recognize the fact, it is a name
that carries with it doubts that might easily account for the
husband's jealousy.  True, I have found no one who dares to hint that
she still continues to attract attention or to bestow smiles in any
direction save where they legally belong.  For since a certain
memorable night which we all know, neither Dr. Zabriskie nor his wife
have been seen save in their own domestic circle, and it is not into
such scenes that this serpent, of which I have spoken, ever intrudes,
nor is it in places of sorrow or suffering that his smile shines, or
his fascinations flourish.

"And so one portion of my theory is proved to be sound.  Dr.
Zabriskie is jealous of his wife: whether with good cause or bad I am
not prepared to decide; for her present attitude, clouded as it is by
the tragedy in which she and her husband are both involved, must
differ very much from that which she held when her life was
unshadowed by doubt, and her admirers could be counted by the score.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I have just found out where Harry is.  As he is in service some
miles up the river, I shall have to be absent from my post for
several hours, but I consider the game well worth the candle.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"Light at last.  I have seen Harry, and, by means known only to the
police, have succeeded in making him talk.  His story is
substantially this: That on the night so often mentioned, he packed
his master's portmanteau at eight o'clock and at ten called a
carriage and rode with the Doctor to the Twenty-ninth Street station.
He was told to buy tickets for Poughkeepsie, where his master had
been called in consultation, and having done this, hurried back to
join his master on the platform.  They had walked together as far as
the cars, and Dr. Zabriskie was just stepping on to the train when a
man pushed himself hurriedly between them and whispered something
into his master's ear, which caused him to fall back and lose his
footing.  Dr. Zabriskie's body slid half under the car, but he was
withdrawn before any harm was done, though the cars gave a lurch at
that moment which must have frightened him exceedingly, for his face
was white when he rose to his feet, and when Harry offered to assist
him again on to the train, he refused to go and said he would return
home and not attempt to ride to Poughkeepsie that night.

"The gentleman, whom Harry now saw to be Mr. Stanton, an intimate
friend of Dr. Zabriskie, smiled very queerly at this, and taking the
Doctor's arm led him away to a carriage.  Harry naturally followed
them, but the Doctor, hearing his steps, turned and bade him, in a
very peremptory tone, to take the omnibus home, and then, as if on
second thought, told him to go to Poughkeepsie in his stead and
explain to the people there that he was too shaken up by his misstep
to do his duty, and that he would be with them next morning.  This
seemed strange to Harry, but he had no reasons for disobeying his
master's orders, and so rode to Poughkeepsie.  But the Doctor did not
follow him the next day; on the contrary, he telegraphed for him to
return, and when he got back dismissed him with a month's wages.
This ended Harry's connection with the Zabriskie family.

"A simple story bearing out what the wife has already told us; but it
furnishes a link which may prove invaluable.  Mr. Stanton, whose
first name is Theodore, knows the real reason why Dr. Zabriskie
returned home on the night of the seventeenth of July, 1851.  Mr.
Stanton, consequently, I must see, and this shall be my business
to-morrow.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"Checkmate!  Theodore Stanton is not in this country.  Though this
points him out as the man from whom Dr. Zabriskie bought the pistol,
it does not facilitate my work, which is becoming more and more
difficult.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"Mr. Stanton's whereabouts are not even known to his most intimate
friends.  He sailed from this country most unexpectedly on the
eighteenth of July a year ago, which was _the day after the murder of
Mr. Hasbrouck_.  It looks like a flight, especially as he has failed
to maintain open communication even with his relatives.  Was he the
man who shot Mr. Hasbrouck?  No; but he was the man who put the
pistol in Dr. Zabriskie's hand that night, and, whether he did this
with purpose or not, was evidently so alarmed at the catastrophe
which followed that he took the first outgoing steamer to Europe.  So
far, all is clear, but there are mysteries yet to be solved, which
will require my utmost tact.  What if I should seek out the gentleman
with whose name that of Mrs. Zabriskie has been linked, and see If I
can in any way connect him with Mr. Stanton or the events of that
night?

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"Eureka!  I have discovered that Mr. Stanton cherished a mortal
hatred for the gentleman above mentioned.  It was a covert feeling,
but no less deadly on that account; and while it never led him into
any extravagances, it was of force sufficient to account for many a
secret misfortune which happened to that gentleman.  Now, if I can
prove he was the Mephistopheles who whispered insinuations into the
ear of our blind Faust, I may strike a fact that will lead me out of
this maze.

"But how can I approach secrets so delicate without compromising the
woman I feel bound to respect, if only for the devoted love she
manifests for her unhappy husband!

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I shall have to appeal to Joe Smithers.  This is something which I
always hate to do, but as long as he will take money, and as long as
he is fertile in resources for obtaining the truth from people I am
myself unable to reach, so long must I make use of his cupidity and
his genius.  He is an honorable fellow in one way, and never retails
as gossip what he acquires for our use.  How will he proceed in this
case, and by what tactics will be gain the very delicate information
which we need?  I own that I am curious to see.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I shall really have to put down at length the incidents of this
night.  I always knew that Joe Smithers was invaluable to the police,
but I really did not know he possessed talents of so high an order.
He wrote me this morning that he had succeeded in getting Mr. T----'s
promise to spend the evening with him, and advised me that if I
desired to be present also, his own servant would not be at home, and
that an opener of bottles would be required.

"As I was very anxious to see Mr. T---- with my own eyes, I accepted
the invitation to play the spy upon a spy, and went at the proper
hour to Mr. Smithers's rooms, which are in the University Building.
I found them picturesque in the extreme.  Piles of books stacked here
and there to the ceiling made nooks and corners which could be quite
shut off by a couple of old pictures that were set into movable
frames that swung out or in at the whim or convenience of the owner.

"As I liked the dark shadows cast by these pictures, I pulled them
both out, and made such other arrangements as appeared likely to
facilitate the purpose I had in view; then I sat down and waited for
the two gentlemen who were expected to come in together.

"They arrived almost immediately, whereupon I rose and played my part
with all necessary discretion.  While ridding Mr. T---- of his
overcoat, I stole a look at his face.  It is not a handsome one, but
it boasts of a gay, devil-may-care expression which doubtless makes
it dangerous to many women, while his manners are especially
attractive, and his voice the richest and most persuasive that I ever
heard.  I contrasted him, almost against my will, with Dr. Zabriskie,
and decided that with most women the former's undoubted fascinations
of speech and bearing would outweigh the latter's great beauty and
mental endowments; but I doubted if they would with her.

"The conversation which immediately began was brilliant but
desultory, for Mr. Smithers, with an airy lightness for which he is
remarkable, introduced topic after topic, perhaps for the purpose of
showing off Mr. T----'s versatility, and perhaps for the deeper and
more sinister purpose of shaking the kaleidoscope of talk so
thoroughly, that the real topic which we were met to discuss should
not make an undue impression on the mind of his guest.

"Meanwhile one, two, three bottles passed, and I saw Joe Smithers's
eye grow calmer and that of Mr. T---- more brilliant and more
uncertain.  As the last bottle showed signs of failing, Joe cast me a
meaning glance, and the real business of the evening began.

"I shall not attempt to relate the half-dozen failures which Joe made
in endeavoring to elicit the facts we were in search of, without
arousing the suspicion of his visitor.  I am only going to relate the
successful attempt.  They had been talking now for some hours, and I,
who had long before been waved from their immediate presence, was
hiding my curiosity and growing excitement behind one of the
pictures, when suddenly I heard Joe say:

"'He has the most remarkable memory I ever met.  He can tell to a day
when any notable event occurred.'

"Pshaw!' answered his companion, who, by the by, was known to pride
himself upon his own memory for dates, 'I can state where I went and
what I did on every day in the year.  That may not embrace what you
call "notable events," but the memory required is all the more
remarkable, is it not?'

"'Pooh!' was his friend's provoking reply, 'you are bluffing, Ben; I
will never believe that.'

"Mr. T----, who had passed by this time into that state of
intoxication which makes persistence in an assertion a duty as well
as a pleasure, threw back his head, and as the wreaths of smoke rose
in airy spirals from his lips, reiterated his statement, and offered
to submit to any test of his vaunted powers which the other might
dictate.

"'You have a diary--' began Joe.

"'Which is at home,' completed the other.

"'Will you allow me to refer to it to-morrow, if I am suspicious of
the accuracy of your recollections?'

"'Undoubtedly,' returned the other.

"'Very well, then, I will wager you a cool fifty that you can not
tell where you were between the hours of ten and eleven on a certain
night which I will name.'

"'Done!' cried the other, bringing out his pocket-book and laying it
on the table before him.

"Joe followed his example and then summoned me.

"'Write a date down here,' he commanded, pushing a piece of paper
toward me, with a look keen as the flash of a blade.  'Any date,
man,' he added, as I appeared to hesitate in the embarrassment I
thought natural under the circumstances.  'Put down day, month, and
year, only don't go too far back; not farther than two years.'

"Smiling with the air of a flunkey admitted to the sports of his
superiors, I wrote a line and laid it before Mr. Smithers, who at
once pushed it with a careless gesture toward his companion.  You can
of course guess the date I made use of: July 17, 1851.  Mr. T----,
who had evidently looked upon this matter as mere play, flushed
scarlet as he read these words, and for one instant looked as if he
had rather flee our presence than answer Joe Smithers's nonchalant
glance of inquiry.

"'I have given my word and will keep it,' he said at last, but with a
look in my direction that sent me reluctantly back to my retreat.  'I
don't suppose you want names,' he went on, 'that is, if anything I
have to tell is of a delicate nature?'

"'O no,' answered the other, 'only facts and places.'

"'I don't think places are necessary either,' he returned.  'I will
tell you what I did and that must serve you.  I did not promise to
give number and street.'

"'Well, well,' Joe exclaimed; 'earn your fifty, that is all.  Show
that you remember where you were on the night of'--and with an
admirable show of indifference he pretended to consult the paper
between them--'the seventeenth of July, 1851, and I shall be
satisfied.'

"'I was at the club for one thing,' said Mr. T----; 'then I went to
see a lady friend, where I stayed till eleven.  She wore a blue
muslin--What is that?'

"I had betrayed myself by a quick movement which sent a glass tumbler
crashing to the floor.  Helen Zabriskie had worn a blue muslin on
that same night.  I had noted it when I stood on the balcony watching
her and her husband.

"'That noise?'  It was Joe who was speaking.  'You don't know Reuben
as well as I do or you wouldn't ask.  It is his practise, I am sorry
to say, to accentuate his pleasure in draining my bottles, by
dropping a glass at every third one.'

"Mr. T---- went on.

"'She was a married woman and I thought she loved me; but--and this
is the greatest proof I can offer you that I am giving you a true
account of that night--she had not had the slightest idea of the
extent of my passion, and only consented to see me at all because she
thought, poor thing, that a word from her would set me straight, and
rid her of attentions that were fast becoming obnoxious.  A sorry
figure for a fellow to cut who has not been without his triumphs; but
you caught me on the most detestable date in my calendar, and--'

"There is where he stopped being interesting, so I will not waste
time by quoting further.  And now what reply shall I make when Joe
Smithers asks me double his usual price, as he will be sure to do,
next time?  Has he not earned an advance?  I really think so.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

"I have spent the whole day in weaving together the facts I have
gleaned, and the suspicions I have formed, into a consecutive whole
likely to present my theory in a favorable light to my superiors.
But just as I thought myself in shape to meet their inquiries, I
received an immediate summons into their presence, where I was given
a duty to perform of so extraordinary and unexpected a nature, that
it effectually drove from my mind all my own plans for the
elucidation of the Zabriskie mystery.

"This was nothing more or less than to take charge of a party of
people who were going to the Jersey Heights for the purpose of
testing Dr. Zabriskie's skill with a pistol."



III

The cause of this sudden move was soon explained to me.  Mrs.
Zabriskie, anxious to have an end put to the present condition of
affairs, had begged for a more rigid examination into her husband's
state.  This being accorded, a strict and impartial inquiry had taken
place, with a result not unlike that which followed the first one.
Three out of his four interrogators judged him insane, and could not
be moved from their opinion though opposed by the verdict of the
young expert who had been living in the house with him.  Dr.
Zabriskie seemed to read their thoughts, and, showing extreme
agitation, begged as before for an opportunity to prove his sanity by
showing his skill in shooting.  This time a disposition was evinced
to grant his request, which Mrs. Zabriskie no sooner perceived, than
she added her supplications to his that the question might be thus
settled.

A pistol was accordingly brought; but at sight of it her courage
failed, and she changed her prayer to an entreaty that the experiment
should be postponed till the next day, and should then take place in
the woods away from the sight and hearing of needless spectators.

Though it would have been much wiser to have ended the matter there
and then, the Superintendent was prevailed upon to listen to her
entreaties, and thus it was that I came to be a spectator, if not a
participator, in the final scene of this most sombre drama.

There are some events which impress the human mind so deeply that
their memory mingles with all after-experiences.  Though I have made
it a rule to forget as soon as possible the tragic episodes into
which I am constantly plunged, there is one scene in my life which
will not depart at my will; and that is the sight which met my eyes
from the bow of the small boat in which Dr. Zabriskie and his wife
were rowed over to Jersey on that memorable afternoon.

Though it was by no means late in the day, the sun was already
sinking, and the bright red glare which filled the heavens and shone
full upon the faces of the half-dozen persons before me added much to
the tragic nature of the scene, though we were far from comprehending
its full significance.

The Doctor sat with his wife in the stern, and it was upon their
faces my glance was fixed.  The glare shone luridly on his sightless
eyeballs, and as I noticed his unwinking lids I realized as never
before what it was to be blind in the midst of sunshine.  Her eyes,
on the contrary, were lowered, but there was a look of hopeless
misery in her colorless face which made her appearance infinitely
pathetic, and I felt confident that if he could only have seen her,
he would not have maintained the cold and unresponsive manner which
chilled the words on her lips and made all advance on her part
impossible.

On the seat in front of them sat the Inspector and a doctor, and from
some quarter, possibly from under the Inspector's coat, there came
the monotonous ticking of a small clock, which, I had been told, was
to serve as a target for the blind man's aim.

This tickling was all I heard, though the noise and bustle of a great
traffic was pressing upon us on every side.  And I am sure it was all
that she heard, as, with hand pressed to her heart and eyes fixed on
the opposite shore, she waited for the event which was to determine
whether the man she loved was a criminal or only a being afflicted of
God, and worthy of her unceasing care and devotion.

As the sun cast its last scarlet gleam over the water, the boat
grounded, and it fell to my lot to assist Mrs. Zabriskie up the bank.
As I did so, I allowed myself to say: "I am your friend, Mrs.
Zabriskie," and was astonished to see her tremble, and turn toward me
with a look like that of a frightened child.

But there was always this characteristic blending in her countenance
of the childlike and the severe, such as may so often be seen in the
faces of nuns, and beyond an added pang of pity for this beautiful
but afflicted woman, I let the moment pass without giving it the
weight it perhaps demanded.

"The Doctor and his wife had a long talk last night," was whispered
in my ear as we wound our way along into the woods.  I turned and
perceived at my side the expert physician, portions of whose diary I
have already quoted.  He had come by another boat.

"But it did not seem to heal whatever breach lies between them," he
proceeded.  Then in a quick, curious tone, he asked: "Do you believe
this attempt on his part is likely to prove anything but a farce?"

"I believe he will shatter the clock to pieces with his first shot,"
I answered, and could say no more, for we had already reached the
ground which had been selected for this trial at arms, and the
various members of the party were being placed in their several
positions.

The Doctor, to whom light and darkness were alike, stood with his
face toward the western glow, and at his side were grouped the
Inspector and the two physicians.  On the arm of one of the latter
hung Dr. Zabriskie's overcoat, which he had taken off as soon as he
reached the field.

Mrs. Zabriskie stood at the other end of the opening, near a tall
stump, upon which it had been decided that the clock should be placed
when the moment came for the Doctor to show his skill.  She had been
accorded the privilege of setting the clock on this stump, and I saw
it shining in her hand as she paused for a moment to glance back at
the circle of gentlemen who were awaiting her movements.  The hands
of the clock stood at five minutes to five, though I scarcely noted
the fact at the time, for her eyes were on mine, and as she passed me
she spoke:

"If he is not himself, he can not be trusted.  Watch him carefully,
and see that he does no mischief to himself or others.  Be at his
right hand, and stop him if he does not handle his pistol properly."

I promised, and she passed on, setting the clock upon the stump and
immediately drawing back to a suitable distance at the right, where
she stood, wrapped in her long dark cloak, quite alone.  Her face
shone ghastly white, even in its environment of snow-covered boughs
which surrounded her, and, noting this, I wished the minutes fewer
between the present moment and the hour of five, at which he was to
draw the trigger.

"Dr. Zabriskie," quoth the Inspector, "we have endeavored to make
this trial a perfectly fair one.  You are to have one shot at a small
clock which has been placed within a suitable distance, and which you
are expected to hit, guided only by the sound which it will make in
striking the hour of five.  Are you satisfied with the arrangement?"

"Perfectly.  Where is my wife?"

"On the other side of the field, some ten paces from the stump upon
which the clock is fixed."

He bowed, and his face showed satisfaction.

"May I expect the clock to strike soon?"

"In less than five minutes," was the answer.

"Then let me have the pistol; I wish to become acquainted with its
size and weight."

We glanced at each other, then across at her.

She made a gesture; it was one of acquiescence.

Immediately the Inspector placed the weapon in the blind man's hand.
It was at once apparent that the Doctor understood the instrument,
and my last doubt vanished as to the truth of all he had told us.

"Thank God I am blind this hour and can not see her," fell
unconsciously from his lips; then, before the echo of these words had
left my ears, he raised his voice and observed calmly enough,
considering that he was about to prove himself a criminal in order to
save himself from being thought a madman:

"Let no one move.  I must have my ears free for catching the first
stroke of the clock."  And he raised the pistol before him.

There was a moment of torturing suspense and deep, unbroken silence.
My eyes were on him, and so I did not watch the clock, but suddenly I
was moved by some irresistible impulse to note how Mrs. Zabriskie was
bearing herself at this critical moment, and, casting a hurried
glance in her direction, I perceived her tall figure swaying from
side to side, as if under an intolerable strain of feeling.  Her eyes
were on the clock, the hands of which seemed to creep with snail-like
pace along the dial, when unexpectedly, and a full minute before the
minute hand had reached the stroke of five, I caught a movement on
her part, saw the flash of something round and white show for an
instant against the darkness of her cloak, and was about to shriek
warning to the Doctor, when the shrill, quick stroke of a clock rang
out on the frosty air, followed by the ping and flash of a pistol.

A sound of shattered glass, followed by a suppressed cry, told us
that the bullet had struck the mark, but before we could move, or rid
our eyes of the smoke which the wind had blown into our faces, there
came another sound which made our hair stand on end and sent the
blood back in terror to our hearts.  Another clock was striking, the
clock which we now perceived was still standing upright on the stump
where Mrs. Zabriskie had placed it.

Whence came the clock, then, which had struck before the time and
been shattered for its pains?  One quick look told us.  On the
ground, ten paces at the right, lay Helen Zabriskie, a broken clock
at her side, and in her breast a bullet which was fast sapping the
life from her sweet eyes.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

We had to tell him, there was such pleading in her looks; and never
shall I forget the scream that rang from his lips as he realized the
truth.  Breaking from our midst, he rushed forward, and fell at her
feet as if guided by some supernatural instinct.

"Helen," he shrieked, "what is this?  Were not my hands dyed deep
enough in blood that you should make me answerable for your life
also?"

Her eyes were closed, but she opened them.  Looking long and steadily
at his agonized face, she faltered forth:

"It is not you who have killed me; it is your crime.  Had you been
innocent of Mr. Hasbrouck's death, your bullet would never have found
my heart.  Did you think I could survive the proof that you had
killed that good man?"

"I--I did it unwittingly.  I--"

"Hush!" she commanded, with an awful look, which, happily, he could
not see.  "I had another motive.  I wished to prove to you, even at
the cost of my life, that I loved you, had always loved you, and
not--"

It was now his turn to silence her.  His hand crept over her lips,
and his despairing face turned itself blindly toward us.

"Go," he cried; "leave us!  Let me take a last farewell of my dying
wife, without listeners or spectators."

Consulting the eye of the physician who stood beside me, and seeing
no hope in it, I fell slowly back.  The others followed, and the
Doctor was left alone with his wife.  From the distant position we
took, we saw her arms creep round his neck, saw her head fall
confidingly on his breast, then silence settled upon them and upon
all nature, the gathering twilight deepening, till the last glow
disappeared from the heavens above and from the circle of leafless
trees which enclosed this tragedy from the outside world.

But at last there came a stir, and Dr. Zabriskie, rising up before
us, with the dead body of his wife held closely to his breast,
confronted us with a countenance so rapturous that he looked like a
man transfigured.

"I will carry her to the boat," said he.  "Not another hand shall
touch her.  She was my true wife, my true wife!"  And he towered into
an attitude of such dignity and passion that for a moment he took on
heroic proportions and we forgot that he had just proved himself to
have committed a cold-blooded and ghastly crime.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

The stars were shining when we again took our seats in the boat; and
if the scene of our crossing to Jersey was impressive, what shall be
said of that of our return?

The Doctor, as before, sat in the stern, an awesome figure, upon
which the moon shone with a white radiance that seemed to lift his
face out of the surrounding darkness and set it, like an image of
frozen horror, before our eyes.  Against his breast he held the form
of his dead wife, and now and then I saw him stoop as if he were
listening for some tokens of life at her set lips.  Then he would
lift himself again, with hopelessness stamped upon his features, only
to lean forward in renewed hope that was again destined to
disappointment.

The Inspector and the accompanying physician had taken seats in the
bow, and unto me had been assigned the special duty of watching over
the Doctor.  This I did from a low seat in front of him.  I was
therefore so close that I heard his laboring breath, and though my
heart was full of awe and compassion, I could not prevent myself from
bending toward him and saying these words:

"Dr. Zabriskie, the mystery of your crime is no longer a mystery to
me.  Listen and see if I do not understand your temptation, and how
you, a conscientious and God-fearing man, came to slay your innocent
neighbor.

"A friend of yours, or so he called himself, had for a long time
filled your ears with tales tending to make you suspicious of your
wife and jealous of a certain man whom I will not name.  You knew
that your friend had a grudge against this man, and so for many
months turned a deaf ear to his insinuations.  But finally some
change which you detected in your wife's bearing or conversation
roused your own suspicions, and you began to doubt if all was false
that came to your ears, and to curse your blindness, which in a
measure rendered you helpless.  The jealous fever grew and had risen
to a high point, when one night--a memorable night--this friend met
you just as you were leaving town, and with cruel craft whispered in
your ear that the man you hated was even then with your wife, and
that if you would return at once to your home you would find him in
her company.

"The demon that lurks at the heart of all men, good or bad, thereupon
took complete possession of you, and you answered this fake friend by
saying that you would not return without a pistol.  Whereupon he
offered to take you to his house and give you his.  You consented,
and getting rid of your servant by sending him to Poughkeepsie with
your excuses, you entered a coach with your friend.

"You say you bought the pistol, and perhaps you did, but, however
that may be, you left his house with it in your pocket and, declining
companionship, walked home, arriving at the Colonnade a little before
midnight.

"Ordinarily you have no difficulty in recognizing your own doorstep.
But, being in a heated frame of mind, you walked faster than usual
and so passed your own house and stopped at that of Mr. Hasbrouck's,
one door beyond.  As the entrances of these houses are all alike,
there was but one way by which you could have made yourself sure that
you had reached your own dwelling, and that was by feeling for the
doctor's sign at the side of the door.  But you never thought of
that.  Absorbed in dreams of vengeance, your sole impulse was to
enter by the quickest means possible.  Taking out your night-key, you
thrust it into the lock.  It fitted, but it took strength to turn it,
so much strength that the key was twisted and bent by the effort.
But this incident, which would have attracted your attention at
another time, was lost upon you at this moment.  An entrance had been
effected, and you were in too excited a frame of mind to notice at
what cost, or to detect the small differences apparent in the
atmosphere and furnishings of the two houses--trifles which would
have arrested your attention under other circumstances, and made you
pause before the upper floor had been reached.

"It was while going up the stairs that you took out your pistol, so
that by the time you arrived at the front-room door you held it ready
cocked and drawn in your hand.  For, being blind, you feared escape
on the part of your victim, and so waited for nothing but the sound
of a man's voice before firing.  When, therefore, the unfortunate Mr.
Hasbrouck, roused by this sudden intrusion, advanced with an
exclamation of astonishment, you pulled the trigger, killing him on
the spot.  It must have been immediately upon his fall that you
recognized from some word he uttered, or from some contact you may
have had with your surroundings, that you were in the wrong house and
had killed the wrong man; for you cried out, in evident remorse,
'God!  what have I done!' and fled without approaching your victim.

"Descending the stairs, you rushed from the house, closing the front
door behind you and regaining your own without being seen.  But here
you found yourself baffled in your attempted escape by two things.
First, by the pistol you still held in your hand, and secondly, by
the fact that the key upon which you depended for entering your own
door was so twisted out of shape that you knew it would be useless
for you to attempt to use it.  What did you do in this emergency?
You have already told us, though the story seemed so improbable at
the time, you found nobody to believe it but myself.  The pistol you
flung far away from you down the pavement, from which, by one of
those rare chances which sometimes happen in this world, it was
presently picked up by some late passer-by of more or less doubtful
character.  The door offered less of an obstacle than you
anticipated; for when you turned to it again you found it, if I am
not greatly mistaken, ajar, left so, as we have reason to believe, by
one who had gone out of it but a few minutes before in a state which
left him but little master of his actions.  It was this fact which
provided you with an answer when you were asked how you succeeded in
getting into Mr. Hasbrouck's house after the family had retired for
the night.

"Astonished at the coincidence, but hailing with gladness the
deliverance which it offered, you went in and ascended at once into
your wife's presence; and it was from her lips, and not from those of
Mrs. Hasbrouck, that the cry arose which startled the neighborhood
and prepared men's minds for the tragic words which were shouted a
moment later from the next house.

"But she who uttered the scream knew of no tragedy save that which
was taking place in her own breast.  She had just repulsed a
dastardly suitor, and, seeing you enter so unexpectedly in a state of
unaccountable horror and agitation, was naturally stricken with
dismay, and thought she saw your ghost, or, what was worse, a
possible avenger; while you, having failed to kill the man you
sought, and having killed a man you esteemed, let no surprise on her
part lure you into any dangerous self-betrayal.  You strove instead
to soothe her, and even attempted to explain the excitement under
which you labored, by an account of your narrow escape at the
station, till the sudden alarm from next door distracted her
attention, and sent both your thoughts and hers in a different
direction.  Not till conscience had fully awakened and the horror of
your act had had time to tell upon your sensitive nature, did you
breathe forth those vague confessions, which, not being supported by
the only explanations which would have made them credible, led her,
as well as the police, to consider you affected in your mind.  Your
pride as a man, and your consideration for her as a woman, kept you
silent, but did not keep the worm from preying upon your heart.

"Am I not correct in my surmises, Dr. Zabriskie, and is not this the
true explanation of your crime?"

With a strange look, he lifted up his face.

"Hush!" said he; "you will awaken her.  See how peacefully she
sleeps!  I should not like to have her awakened now, she is so tired,
and I--I have not watched over her as I should."

Appalled at his gesture, his look, his tone, I drew back, and for a
few minutes no sound was to be heard but the steady dip-dip of the
oars and the lap-lap of the waters against the boat.  Then there came
a quick uprising, the swaying before me of something dark and tall
and threatening, and before I could speak or move, or even stretch
forth my hands to stay him, the seat before me was empty, and
darkness had filled the place where but an instant previous he had
sat, a fearsome figure, erect and rigid as a sphinx.

What little moonlight there was only served to show us a few rising
bubbles, marking the spot where the unfortunate man had sunk with his
much-loved burden.  We could not save him.  As the widening circles
fled farther and farther out, the tide drifted us away, and we lost
the spot which had seen the termination of one of earth's saddest
tragedies.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

The bodies were never recovered.  The police reserved to themselves
the right of withholding from the public the real facts which made
this catastrophe an awful remembrance to those who witnessed it.  A
verdict of accidental death by drowning answered all purposes, and
saved the memory of the unfortunate pair from such calumny as might
have otherwise assailed it.  It was the least we could do for two
beings whom circumstances had so greatly afflicted.




THE RAJAH'S DIAMOND

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

_The four stories published under this general title are four steps
in the unraveling of the mystery of "The Pride of Kashgar," that
marvelous diamond "as big as a duck's egg and without a flaw, whose
value, in money, would be sufficient to build cathedrals more stately
than Ely or Cologne."  Through them moves that prince of
entertainers, Prince Florizel of Bohemia.  The buoyant, extravagant
note of the author is one of the most refreshing things in
short-story literature, and the stories have that rare quality of
charm which was the peculiar grace of the author's personality._



THE RAJAH'S DIAMOND

By ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

--------

STORY OF THE BANDBOX

Up to the age of sixteen, at a private school and afterward at one of
those great institutions for which England is justly famous, Mr.
Harry Hartley had received the ordinary education of a gentleman.  At
that period, he manifested a remarkable distaste for study; and his
only surviving parent being both weak and ignorant, he was permitted
thenceforward to spend his time in the attainment of petty and purely
elegant accomplishments.  Two years later, he was left an orphan and
almost a beggar.  For all active and industrious pursuits, Harry was
unfitted alike by nature and training.  He could sing romantic
ditties, and accompany himself with discretion on the piano; he was a
graceful although a timid cavalier; he had a pronounced taste for
chess; and nature had sent him into the world with one of the most
engaging exteriors that can well be fancied.  Blond and pink, with
dove's eyes and a gentle smile, he had an air of agreeable tenderness
and melancholy, and the most submissive and caressing manners.  But
when all is said, he was not the man to lead armaments of war, or
direct the councils of a state.

A fortunate chance and some influence obtained for Harry, at the time
of his bereavement, the position of private secretary to
Major-General Sir Thomas Vandeleur, C.B.  Sir Thomas was a man of
sixty, loud-spoken, boisterous, and domineering.  For some reason,
some service the nature of which had been often whispered and
repeatedly denied, the Rajah of Kashgar had presented this officer
with the sixth known diamond of the world.  The gift transformed
General Vandeleur from a poor into a wealthy man, from an obscure and
unpopular soldier into one of the lions of London society; the
possessor of the Rajah's Diamond was welcome in the most exclusive
circles; and he had found a lady, young, beautiful, and well-born,
who was willing to call the diamond hers even at the price of
marriage with Sir Thomas Vandeleur.  It was commonly said at the time
that, as like draws to like, one jewel had attracted another;
certainly Lady Vandeleur was not only a gem of the finest water in
her own person, but she showed herself to the world in a very costly
setting; and she was considered by many respectable authorities as
one among the three or four best dressed women in England.

Harry's duty as secretary was not particularly onerous; but he had a
dislike for all prolonged work; it gave him pain to ink his fingers;
and the charm of Lady Vandeleur and her toilets drew him often from
the library to the boudoir.  He had the prettiest ways among women,
could talk fashions with enjoyment, and was never more happy than
when criticizing a shade of ribbon, or running on an errand to the
milliner's.  In short, Sir Thomas's correspondence fell into pitiful
arrears, and my Lady had another lady's-maid.

At last the General, who was one of the least patient of military
commanders, arose from his place in a violent access of passion, and
indicated to his secretary that he had no further need for his
services, with one of those explanatory gestures which are most
rarely employed between gentlemen.  The door being unfortunately
open, Mr. Hartley fell downstairs headforemost.

He arose somewhat hurt and very deeply aggrieved.  The life in the
General's house precisely suited him; he moved, on a more or less
doubtful footing, in very genteel company, he did little, he ate of
the best, and he had a lukewarm satisfaction in the presence of Lady
Vandeleur, which, in his own heart, he dubbed by a more emphatic name.

Immediately after he had been outraged by the military foot, he
hurried to the boudoir and recounted his sorrows.

"You know very well, my dear Harry," replied Lady Vandeleur, for she
called him by name like a child or a domestic servant, "that you
never by any chance do what the General tells you.  No more do I, you
may say.  But that is different.  A woman can earn her pardon for a
good year of disobedience by a single adroit submission; and,
besides, no one is married to his private secretary.  I shall be
sorry to lose you; but since you can not stay longer in a house where
you have been insulted, I shall wish you good-by, and I promise you
to make the General smart for his behavior."

Harry's countenance fell; tears came into his eyes and he gazed on
Lady Vandeleur with a tender reproach.

"My Lady," said he, "what is an insult?  I should think little indeed
of any one who could not forgive them by the score.  But to leave
one's friend; to tear up the bonds of affection--"

He was unable to continue, for his emotion choked him, and he began
to weep.

Lady Vandeleur looked at him with a curious expression.  "This little
fool," she thought, "imagines himself to be in love with me.  Why
should he not become my servant instead of the General's?  He is
good-natured, obliging, and understands dress; and besides it will
keep him out of mischief.  He is positively too pretty to be
unattached."

That night she talked over the General, who was already somewhat
ashamed of his vivacity; and Harry was transferred to the feminine
department, where his life was little short of heavenly.  He was
always dressed with uncommon nicety, wore delicate flowers in his
buttonhole, and could entertain a visitor with tact and pleasantry.
He took a pride in servility to a beautiful woman; received Lady
Vandeleur's commands as so many marks of favor; and was pleased to
exhibit himself before other men, who derided and despised him, in
his character of male lady's-maid and man milliner.  Nor could he
think enough of his existence from a moral point of view.  Wickedness
seemed to him an essentially male attribute, and to pass one's days
with a delicate woman, and principally occupied about trimmings, was
to inhabit an enchanted isle among the storms of life.

One fine morning he came into the drawing-room and began to arrange
some music on the top of the piano.  Lady Vandeleur, at the other end
of the apartment, was speaking somewhat eagerly with her brother,
Charlie Pendragon, an elderly young man, much broken with
dissipation, and very lame of one foot.  The private secretary, to
whose entrance they paid no regard, could not avoid overhearing a
part of their conversation.

"To-day or never," said the lady.  "Once and for all, it shall be
done to-day."

"To-day if it must be," replied the brother, with a sigh.  "But it is
a false step, a ruinous step, Clara; and we shall live to repent it
dismally."

Lady Vandeleur looked her brother steadily and somewhat strangely in
the face.

"You forget," she said; "the man must die at last."

"Upon my word, Clara," said Pendragon, "I believe you are the most
heartless rascal in England."

"You men," she returned, "are so coarsely built, that you can never
appreciate a shade of meaning.  You are yourselves rapacious,
violent, immodest, careless of distinction; and yet the least thought
for the future shocks you in a woman.  I have no patience with such
stuff.  You would despise in a common banker the imbecility that you
expect to find in us."

"You are very likely right," replied her brother; "you were always
cleverer than I.  And, anyway, you know my motto: 'The family before
all.'"

"Yes, Charlie," she returned, taking his hand in hers, "I know your
motto better than you know it yourself.  'And Clara before the
family!'  Is not that the second part of it?  Indeed, you are the
best of brothers, and I love you dearly."

Mr. Pendragon got up, looking a little confused by these family
endearments.

"I had better not be seen," said he.  "I understand my part to a
miracle, and I'll keep an eye on the Tame Cat."

"Do," she replied.  "He is an abject creature, and might ruin all."

She kissed the tips of her fingers to him daintily; and the brother
withdrew by the boudoir and the back stair.

"Harry," said Lady Vandeleur, turning toward the secretary as soon as
they were alone, "I have a commission for you this morning.  But you
shall take a cab; I can not have my secretary freckled."

She spoke the last words with emphasis and a look of half-motherly
pride that caused great contentment to poor Harry; and he professed
himself charmed to find an opportunity of serving her.

"It is another of our great secrets," she went on, archly, "and no
one must know of it but my secretary and me.  Sir Thomas would make
the saddest disturbance; and if you only knew how weary I am of these
scenes!  Oh, Harry, Harry, can you explain to me what makes you men
so violent and unjust?  But, indeed, I know you can not; you are the
only man in the world who knows nothing of these shameful passions;
you are so good, Harry, and so kind; you, at least, can be a woman's
friend; and, do you know? I think you make the others more ugly by
comparison."

"It is you," said Harry, gallantly, "who are so kind to me.  You
treat me like--"

"Like a mother," interposed Lady Vandeleur, "I try to be a mother to
you.  Or, at least," she corrected herself with a smile, "almost a
mother.  I am afraid I am too young to be your mother really.  Let us
say a friend--a dear friend."

She paused long enough to let her words take effect in Harry's
sentimental quarters, but not long enough to allow him a reply.

"But all this is beside our purpose," she resumed.  "You will find a
bandbox in the left-hand side of the oak wardrobe; it is underneath
the pink slip that I wore on Wednesday with my Mechlin.  You will
take it immediately to this address," and she gave him a paper; "but
do not, on any account, let it out of your hands until you have
received a receipt written by myself.  Do you understand?  Answer, if
you please--answer!  This is extremely important, and I must ask you
to pay some attention."

Harry pacified her by repeating her instructions perfectly; and she
was just going to tell him more when General Vandeleur flung into the
apartment, scarlet with anger, and holding a long and elaborate
milliner's bill in his hand.

"Will you look at this, madam!" cried he.  "Will you have the
goodness to look at this document?  I know well enough you married me
for my money, and I hope I can make as great allowances as any other
man in the service; but, as sure as God made me, I mean to put a
period to this disreputable prodigality."

"Mr. Hartley," said Lady Vandeleur, "I think you understand what you
have to do.  May I ask you to see to it at once?"

"Stop," said the General, addressing Harry, "one word before you go."
And then, turning again to Lady Vandeleur, "What is this precious
fellow's errand?" he demanded.  "I trust him no further than I do
yourself, let me tell you.  If he had as much as the rudiments of
honesty, he would scorn to stay in this house; and what he does for
his wages is a mystery to all the world.  What is his errand, madam?
and why are you hurrying him away?"

"I supposed you had something to say to me in private," replied the
lady.

"You spoke about an errand," insisted the General.  "Do not attempt
to deceive me in my present state of temper.  You certainly spoke
about an errand."

"If you insist on making your servants privy to our humiliating
dissensions," replied Lady Vandeleur, "perhaps I had better ask Mr.
Hartley to sit down.  No?" she continued; "then you may go, Mr.
Hartley.  I trust you may remember all that you have heard in this
room; it may be useful to you."

Harry at once made his escape from the drawing-room; and as he ran
upstairs he could hear the General's voice upraised in declamation,
and the thin tones of Lady Vandeleur planting icy repartees at every
opening.  How cordially he admired the wife!  How skilfully she could
evade an awkward question! with what secure effrontery she repeated
her instructions under the very guns of the enemy! and on the other
hand, how he detested the husband!

There had been nothing unfamiliar in the morning's events, for he was
continually in the habit of serving Lady Vandeleur on secret
missions, principally connected with millinery.  There was a skeleton
in the house, as he well knew.  The bottomless extravagance and the
unknown liabilities of the wife had long since swallowed her own
fortune, and threatened day by day to engulf that of the husband.
Once or twice in every year exposure and ruin seemed imminent, and
Harry kept trotting round to all sorts of furnishers' shops, telling
small fibs, and paying small advances on the gross amount, until
another term was tided over, and the lady and her faithful secretary
breathed again.  For Harry, in a double capacity, was heart and soul
upon that side of the war: not only did he adore Lady Vandeleur and
fear and dislike her husband, but he naturally sympathized with the
love of finery, and his own single extravagance was at the tailor's.

He found the bandbox where it had been described, arranged his toilet
with care, and left the house.  The sun shone brightly; the distance
he had to travel was considerable, and he remembered with dismay that
the General's sudden irruption had prevented Lady Vandeleur from
giving him money for a cab.  On this sultry day there was every
chance that his complexion would suffer severely; and to walk through
so much of London with a bandbox on his arm was a humiliation almost
insupportable to a youth of his character.  He paused, and took
counsel with himself.  The Vandeleurs lived in Eaton Place; his
destination was near Notting Hill; plainly, he might cross the Park
by keeping well in the open and avoiding populous alleys; and he
thanked his stars when he reflected that it was still comparatively
early in the day.

Anxious to be rid of his incubus, he walked somewhat faster than his
ordinary, and he was already some way through Kensington Gardens
when, in a solitary spot among the trees, he found himself confronted
by the General.

"I beg your pardon, Sir Thomas," observed Harry, politely falling on
one side; for the other stood directly in his path.

"Where are you going, sir?" asked the General.

"I am taking a little walk among the trees," replied the lad.

The General struck the bandbox with his cane.

"With that thing?" he cried; "you lie, sir, and you know you lie!"

"Indeed, Sir Thomas," returned Harry, "I am not accustomed to be
questioned in so high a key."

"You do not understand your position," said the General.  "You are my
servant, and a servant of whom I have conceived the most serious
suspicions.  How do I know but that your box is full of teaspoons?"

"It contains a silk hat belonging to a friend," said Harry.

"Very well," replied General Vandeleur.  "Then I want to see your
friend's silk hat.  I have," he added, grimly, "a singular curiosity
for hats; and I believe you know me to be somewhat positive."

"I beg your pardon, Sir Thomas, I am exceedingly grieved," Harry
apologized; "but indeed this is a private affair."

The General caught him roughly by the shoulder with one hand, while
he raised his cane in the most menacing manner with the other.  Harry
gave himself up for lost; but at the same moment Heaven vouchsafed
him an unexpected defender in the person of Charlie Pendragon, who
now strode forward from behind the trees.

"Come, come, General, hold your hand," said he, "this is neither
courteous nor manly."

"Aha!" cried the General, wheeling round upon his new antagonist,
"Mr. Pendragon!  And do you suppose, Mr. Pendragon, that, because I
have had the misfortune to marry your sister, I shall suffer myself
to be dogged and thwarted by a discredited and bankrupt libertine
like you?  My acquaintance with Lady Vandeleur, sir, has taken away
all my appetite for the other members of her family."

"And do you fancy, General Vandeleur," retorted Charlie, "that,
because my sister has had the misfortune to marry you, she there and
then forfeited her rights and privileges as a lady?  I own, sir, that
by that action she did as much as anybody could to derogate from her
position; but to me she is still a Pendragon.  I make it my business
to protect her from ungentlemanly outrage, and if you were ten times
her husband I would not permit her liberty to be restrained, nor her
private messengers to be violently arrested."

"How is that, Mr. Hartley?" interrogated the General.  "Mr. Pendragon
is of my opinion, it appears.  He too suspects that Lady Vandeleur
has something to do with your friend's silk hat."

Charlie saw that he had committed an unpardonable blunder, which he
hastened to repair.

"How, sir?" he cried; "I suspect, do you say?  I suspect nothing.
Only where I find strength abused and a man brutalizing his
inferiors, I take the liberty to interfere."

As he said these words he made a sign to Harry, which the latter was
too dull or too much troubled to understand.

"In what way am I to construe your attitude, sir?" demanded Vandeleur.

"Why, sir, as you please," returned Pendragon.

The General once more raised his cane, and made a cut for Charlie's
head; but the latter, lame foot and all, evaded the blow with his
umbrella, ran in, and immediately closed with his formidable
adversary.

"Run, Harry, run!" he cried; "run, you dolt!"

Harry stood petrified for a moment, watching the two men sway
together in this fierce embrace; then he turned and took to his
heels.  When he cast a glance over his shoulder he saw the General
prostrate under Charlie's knee, but still making desperate efforts to
reverse the situation; and the Gardens seemed to have filled with
people, who were running from all directions toward the scene of the
fight.  This spectacle lent the secretary wings; and he did not relax
his pace until he had gained the Bayswater road, and plunged at
random into an unfrequented by-street.

To see two gentlemen of his acquaintance thus brutally mauling each
other was deeply shocking to Harry.  He desired to forget the sight;
he desired, above all, to put as great a distance as possible between
himself and General Vandeleur; and in his eagerness for this he
forgot everything about his destination and hurried before him
headlong and trembling.  When he remembered that Lady Vandeleur was
the wife of one and the sister of the other of these gladiators, his
heart was touched with sympathy for a woman so distressingly
misplaced in life.  Even his own situation in the General's household
looked hardly so pleasing as usual in the light of these violent
transactions.

He had walked some little distance, busied with these meditations,
before a slight collision with another passenger reminded him of the
bandbox on his arm.

"Heavens!" cried he, "where was my head? and whither have I wandered?"

Thereupon he consulted the envelope which Lady Vandeleur had given
him.  The address was there, but without a name.  Harry was simply
directed to ask for "the gentleman who expected a parcel from Lady
Vandeleur," and if he were not at home to await his return.  The
gentleman, added the note, should present a receipt in the
handwriting of the lady herself.  All this seemed mightily
mysterious, and Harry was above all astonished at the omission of the
name and the formality of the receipt.  He had thought little of this
last when he heard it dropped in conversation; but reading it in cold
blood, and taking it in connection with the other strange
particulars, he became convinced that he was engaged in perilous
affairs.  For half a moment he had a doubt of Lady Vandeleur herself;
for he found these obscure proceedings somewhat unworthy of so high a
lady, and became more critical when her secrets were preserved
against himself.  But her empire over his spirit was too complete, he
dismissed his suspicions and blamed himself roundly for having so
much as entertained them.

In one thing, however, his duty and interest, his generosity and his
terrors, coincided--to get rid of the bandbox with the greatest
possible despatch.

He accosted the first policeman and courteously inquired his way.  It
turned out that he was already not far from his destination, and a
walk of a few minutes brought him to a small house in a lane, freshly
painted, and kept with the most scrupulous attention.  The knocker
and bell-pull were highly polished; flowering pot-herbs garnished the
sills of the different windows; and curtains of some rich material
concealed the interior from the eyes of curious passengers.  The
place had an air of repose and secrecy; and Harry was so far caught
with this spirit that he knocked with more than usual discretion, and
was more than usually careful to remove all impurity from his boots.

A servant-maid of some personal attractions immediately opened the
door, and seemed to regard the secretary with no unkind eyes.

"This is the parcel from Lady Vandeleur," said Harry.

"I know," replied the maid, with a nod.  "But the gentleman is from
home.  Will you leave it with me?"

"I can not," answered Harry.  "I am directed not to part with it but
upon a certain condition, and I must ask you, I am afraid, to let me
wait."

"Well," said she, "I suppose I may let you wait.  I am lonely enough,
I can tell you, and you do not look as though you would eat a girl.
But be sure and do not ask the gentleman's name, for that I am not to
tell you."

"Do you say so?" cried Harry.  "Why, how strange!  But indeed for
some time back I walk among surprises.  One question I think I may
surely ask without indiscretion: Is he the master of this house?"

"He is a lodger, and not eight days old at that," returned the maid.
"And now a question for a question: Do you know Lady Vandeleur?"

"I am her private secretary," replied Harry, with a glow of modest
pride.

"She is pretty, is she not?" pursued the servant.

"Oh, beautiful!" cried Harry; "wonderfully lovely, and not less good
and kind!"

"You look kind enough yourself," she retorted; "and I wager you are
worth a dozen Lady Vandeleurs."

Harry was properly scandalized.

"I!" he cried.  "I am only a secretary!"

"Do you mean that for me?" said the girl.  "Because I am only a
housemaid, if you please."  And then, relenting at the sight of
Harry's obvious confusion, "I know you mean nothing of the sort," she
added; "and I like your looks; but I think nothing of your Lady
Vandeleur.  Oh, these mistresses!" she cried.  "To send out a real
gentleman like you--with a bandbox--in broad day!"

During this talk they had remained in their original positions--she
on the doorstep, he on the sidewalk, bareheaded for the sake of
coolness, and with the bandbox on his arm.  But upon this last
speech, Harry, who was unable to support such pointblank compliments
to his appearance, nor the encouraging look with which they were
accompanied, began to change his attitude, and glance from left to
right in perturbation.  In so doing he turned his face toward the
lower end of the lane, and there, to his indescribable dismay, his
eyes encountered those of General Vandeleur.  The General, in a
prodigious fluster of heat, hurry, and indignation, had been scouring
the streets in chase of his brother-in-law; but so soon as he caught
a glimpse of the delinquent secretary, his purpose changed, his anger
flowed into a new channel, and he turned on his heel and came tearing
up the lane with truculent gestures and vociferations.

Harry made but one bolt of it into the house, driving the maid before
him; and the door was slammed in his pursuer's countenance.

"Is there a bar?  Will it lock?" asked Harry, while a salvo on the
knocker made the house echo from wall to wall.

"Why, what is wrong with you?" asked the maid.  "Is it this old
gentleman?"

"If he gets hold of me," whispered Harry, "I am as good as dead.  He
has been pursuing me all day, carries a sword-stick, and is an Indian
military officer."

"These are fine manners," cried the maid.  "And what, if you please,
may be his name?"

"It is the General, my master," answered Harry.  "He is after this
bandbox."

"Did not I tell you?" cried the maid in triumph.  "I told you I
thought worse than nothing of your Lady Vandeleur; and if you had an
eye in your head you might see what she is for yourself.  An
ungrateful minx, I will be bound for that!"

The General renewed his attack upon the knocker, and his passion
growing with delay, began to kick and beat upon the panels of the
door.

"It is lucky," observed the girl, "that I am alone in the house; your
General may hammer until he is weary, and there is none to open for
him.  Follow me!"

So saying, she led Harry into the kitchen, where she made him sit
down, and stood by him herself in an affectionate attitude, with a
hand upon his shoulder.  The din at the door, so far from abating,
continued to increase in volume, and at each blow the unhappy
secretary was shaken to the heart.

"What is your name?" asked the girl.

"Harry Hartley," he replied.

"Mine," she went on, "is Prudence.  Do you like it?"

"Very much," said Harry.  "But hear for a moment how the General
beats upon the door.  He will certainly break it in, and then, in
Heaven's name, what have I to look for but death?"

"You put yourself very much about with no occasion," answered
Prudence.  "Let your General knock, he will do no more than blister
his hands.  Do you think I would keep you here, if I were not sure to
save you?  Oh, no, I am a good friend to those that please me! and we
have a back door upon another lane.  But," she added, checking him,
for he had got upon his feet immediately on this welcome news, "but I
will not show you where it is unless you kiss me.  Will you, Harry?"

"That I will," he cried, remembering his gallantry, "not for your
back door, but because you are good and pretty."

And he administered two or three cordial salutes, which were returned
to him in kind.

Then Prudence led him to the back gate, and put her hand upon the key.

"Will you come and see me?" she asked.

"I will, indeed," said Harry.  "Do not I owe you my life?"

"And now," she added, opening the door, "run as hard as you can, for
I shall let in the General."

Harry scarcely required this advice; fear had him by the forelock;
and he addressed himself diligently to flight.  A few steps, and he
believed he would escape from his trials, and return to Lady
Vandeleur in honor and safety.  But these few steps had not been
taken before he heard a man's voice hailing him by name with many
execrations, and looking over his shoulder, he beheld Charlie
Pendragon waving him with both arms to return.  The shock of this new
incident was so sudden and profound, and Harry was already worked
into so high a state of nervous tension, that he could think of
nothing better than to accelerate his pace, and continue running.  He
should certainly have remembered the scene in Kensington Gardens; he
should certainly have concluded that, where the General was his
enemy, Charlie Pendragon could be no other than a friend.  But such
was the fever and perturbation of his mind that he was struck by none
of these considerations, and only continued to run the faster up the
lane.

Charlie, by the sound of his voice and the vile terms that he hurled
after the secretary, was obviously beside himself with rage.  He,
too, ran his very best; but, try as he might, the physical advantages
were not upon his side, and his outcries and the fall of his lame
foot on the macadam began to fall further and further into the wake.

Harry's hopes began once more to arise.  The lane was both steep and
narrow, but it was exceedingly solitary, bordered on either hand by
garden walls, overhung with foliage; and, for as far as the fugitive
could see in front of him, there was neither a creature moving nor an
open door.  Providence, weary of persecution, was now offering him an
open field for his escape.

Alas! as he came abreast of a garden door under a tuft of chestnuts,
it was suddenly drawn back, and he could see inside, upon a garden
path, the figure of a butcher's boy with his tray upon his arm.  He
had hardly recognized the fact before he was some steps beyond upon
the other side.  But the fellow had had time to observe him; he was
evidently much surprised to see a gentleman go by at so unusual a
pace; and he came out into the lane and began to call after Harry
with shouts of ironical encouragement.

His appearance gave a new idea to Charlie Pendragon, who, although he
was now sadly out of breath, once more upraised his voice.

"Stop thief!" he cried.

And immediately the butcher's boy had taken up the cry and joined in
the pursuit.

This was a bitter moment for the hunted secretary.  It is true that
his terror enabled him once more to improve his pace, and gain with
every step on his pursuers; but he was well aware that he was near
the end of his resources, and should he meet any one coming the other
way, his predicament in the narrow lane would be desperate indeed.

"I must find a place of concealment," he thought, "and that within
the next few seconds, or all is over with me in this world."

Scarcely had the thought crossed his mind than the lane took a sudden
turning; and he found himself hidden from his enemies.  There are
circumstances in which even the least energetic of mankind learn to
behave with vigor and decision; and the most cautious forget their
prudence and embrace foolhardy resolutions.  This was one of those
occasions for Harry Hartley; and those who knew him best would have
been the most astonished at the lad's audacity.  He stopped dead,
flung the bandbox over a garden wall; and leaping upward with
incredible agility and seizing the copestone with his hands, he
tumbled headlong after it into the garden.

He came to himself a moment afterward, seated in a border of small
rose-bushes.  His hands and knees were cut and bleeding, for the wall
had been protected against such an escalade by a liberal provision of
old bottles; and he was conscious of a general dislocation and a
painful swimming in the head.  Facing him across the garden, which
was in admirable order, and set with flowers of the most delicious
perfume, he beheld the back of a house.  It was of considerable
extent, and plainly habitable; but, in odd contrast to the grounds,
it was crazy, ill-kept, and of a mean appearance.  On all other sides
the circuit of the garden wall appeared unbroken.

He took in these features of the scene with mechanical glances, but
his mind was still unable to piece together or draw a rational
conclusion from what he saw.  And when he heard footsteps advancing
on the gravel, although he turned his eyes in that direction, it was
with no thought either for defense or flight.

The newcomer was a large, coarse, and very sordid personage, in
gardening clothes, and with a watering-pot in his left hand.  One
less confused would have been affected with some alarm at the sight
of this man's huge proportions and black and lowering eyes.  But
Harry was too gravely shaken by his fall to be so much as terrified;
and if he was unable to divert his glances from the gardener, he
remained absolutely passive, and suffered him to draw near, to take
him by the shoulder, and to plant him roughly on his feet, without a
motion of resistance.

For a moment the two stared into each other's eyes, Harry fascinated,
the man filled with wrath and a cruel, sneering humor.

"Who are you?" he demanded at last.  "Who are you to come flying over
my wall and break my _Gloire de Dijons_?  What is your name?" he
added, shaking him; "and what may be your business here?"

Harry could not as much as proffer a word in explanation.

But just at that moment Pendragon and the butcher's boy went clumping
past, and the sound of their feet and their hoarse cries echoed
loudly in the narrow lane.  The gardener had received his answer; and
he looked down into Harry's face with an obnoxious smile.

"A thief!" he said.  "Upon my word, and a very good thing you must
make of it; for I see you dressed like a gentleman from top to toe.
Are you not ashamed to go about the world in such a trim, with honest
folk, I dare say, glad to buy your cast-off finery second-hand.
Speak up, you dog," the man went on; "you can understand English, I
suppose; and I mean to have a bit of talk with you before I march you
to the station."

"Indeed, sir," said Harry, "this is all a dreadful misconception; and
if you will go with me to Sir Thomas Vandeleur's in Eaton Place, I
can promise that all will be made plain.  The most upright person, as
I now perceive, can be led into suspicious positions."

"My little man," replied the gardener, "I will go with you no further
than the station-house in the next street.  The inspector, no doubt,
will be glad to take a stroll with you as far as Eaton Place, and
have a bit of afternoon tea with your great acquaintances.  Or would
you prefer to go direct to the Home Secretary?  Sir Thomas Vandeleur,
indeed!  Perhaps you think I don't know a gentleman when I see one
from a common run-the-hedge like you?  Clothes or no clothes, I can
read you like a book.  Here is a shirt that maybe cost as much as my
Sunday hat; and that coat, I take it, has never seen the inside of
Rag-fair, and then your boots--"

The man, whose eyes had fallen upon the ground, stopped short in his
insulting commentary, and remained for a moment looking intently upon
something at his feet.  When he spoke his voice was strangely altered.

"What, in God's name," said he, "is all this?"

Harry, following the direction of the man's eyes, beheld a spectacle
that struck him dumb with terror and amazement.  In his fall he had
descended vertically upon the bandbox and burst it open from end to
end; thence a great treasure of diamonds had poured forth, and now
lay abroad, part trodden in the soil, part scattered on the surface
in regal and glittering profusion.  There was a magnificent coronet
which he had often admired on Lady Vandeleur; there were rings and
brooches, ear-drops and bracelets, and even unset brilliants rolling
here and there among the rose-bushes like drops of morning dew.  A
princely fortune lay between the two men upon the ground--a fortune
in the most inviting, solid, and durable form, capable of being
carried in an apron, beautiful in itself, and scattering the sunlight
in a million rainbow flashes.

"Good God!" said Harry, "I am lost!"

His mind raced backward into the past with the incalculable velocity
of thought, and he began to comprehend his day's adventures, to
conceive them as a whole, and to recognize the sad imbroglio in which
his own character and fortunes had become involved.  He looked round
him as if for help, but he was alone in the garden, with his
scattered diamonds and his redoubtable interlocutor; and when he gave
ear, there was no sound but the rustle of the leaves and the hurried
pulsation of his heart.  It was little wonder if the young man felt
himself deserted by his spirits, and with a broken voice repeated his
last ejaculation:

"I am lost!"

The gardener peered in all directions with an air of guilt; but there
was no face at any of the windows, and he seemed to breathe again.

"Pick up a heart," he said, "you fool!  The worst of it is done.  Why
could you not say at first there was enough for two?  Two?" he
repeated, "aye, and for two hundred!  But come away from here, where
we may be observed; and, for the love of wisdom, straighten out your
hat and brush your clothes.  You could not travel two steps the
figure of fun you look just now."

While Harry mechanically adopted these suggestions, the gardener,
getting upon his knees, hastily drew together the scattered jewels
and returned them to the bandbox.  The touch of these costly crystals
sent a shiver of emotion through the man's stalwart frame; his face
was transfigured, and his eyes shone with concupiscence; indeed it
seemed as if he luxuriously prolonged his occupation, and dallied
with every diamond that he handled.  At last, however, it was done;
and, concealing the bandbox in his smock, the gardener beckoned to
Harry and preceded him in the direction of the house.

Near the door they were met by a young man evidently in holy orders,
dark and strikingly handsome, with a look of mingled weakness and
resolution, and very neatly attired after the manner of his caste.
The gardener was plainly annoyed by this encounter; but he put as
good a face upon it as he could, and accosted the clergyman with an
obsequious and smiling air.

"Here is a fine afternoon, Mr. Rolles," said he: "a fine afternoon,
as sure as God made it!  And here is a young friend of mine who had a
fancy to look at my roses.  I took the liberty to bring him in, for I
thought none of the lodgers would object."

"Speaking for myself," replied the Reverend Mr. Rolles, "I do not;
nor do I fancy any of the rest of us would be more difficult upon so
small a matter.  The garden is your own, Mr. Raeburn; we must none of
us forget that; and because you give us liberty to walk there we
should be indeed ungracious if we so far presumed upon your
politeness as to interfere with the convenience of your friends.
But, on second thoughts," he added, "I believe that this gentleman
and I have met before.  Mr. Hartley, I think.  I regret to observe
that you have had a fall."

And he offered his hand.

A sort of maiden dignity and a desire to delay as long as possible
the necessity for explanation moved Harry to refuse this chance of
help, and to deny his own identity.  He chose the tender mercies of
the gardener, who was at least unknown to him, rather than the
curiosity and perhaps the doubts of an acquaintance.

"I fear there is some mistake," said he.  "My name is Thomlinson and
I am a friend of Mr. Raeburn's."

"Indeed?" said Mr. Rolles.  "The likeness is amazing."

Mr. Raeburn, who had been upon thorns throughout this colloquy, now
felt it high time to bring it to a period.

"I wish you a pleasant saunter, sir," said he.

And with that he dragged Harry after him into the house, and then
into a chamber on the garden.  His first care was to draw down the
blind, for Mr. Rolles still remained where they had left him, in an
attitude of perplexity and thought.  Then he emptied the broken
bandbox on the table, and stood before the treasure, thus fully
displayed, with an expression of rapturous greed, and rubbing his
hands upon his thighs.  For Harry, the sight of the man's face under
the influence of this base emotion, added another pang to those he
was already suffering.  It seemed incredible that, from his life of
pure and delicate trifling, he should be plunged in a breath among
sordid and criminal relations.  He could reproach his conscience with
no sinful act; and yet he was now suffering the punishment of sin in
its most acute and cruel forms--the dread of punishment, the
suspicions of the good, and the companionship and contamination of
vile and brutal natures.  He felt he could lay his life down with
gladness to escape from the room and the society of Mr. Raeburn.

"And now," said the latter, after he had separated the jewels into
two nearly equal parts, and drawn one of them nearer to himself; "and
now," said he, "everything in this world has to be paid for, and some
things sweetly.  You must know, Mr. Hartley, if such be your name,
that I am a man of a very easy temper, and good nature has been my
stumbling-block from first to last.  I could pocket the whole of
these pretty pebbles, if I chose, and I should like to see you dare
to say a word; but I think I must have taken a liking to you; for I
declare I have not the heart to shave you so close.  So, do you see,
in pure kind feeling, I propose that we divide; and these,"
indicating the two heaps, "are the proportions that seem to me just
and friendly.  Do you see any objection, Mr. Hartley, may I ask?  I
am not the man to stick upon a brooch."

"But, sir," cried Harry, "what you propose to me is impossible.  The
jewels are not mine, and I can not share what is another's, no matter
with whom, nor in what proportions."

"They are not yours, are they not?" returned Raeburn.  "And you could
not share them with anybody, couldn't you?  Well now, that is what I
call a pity; for here am I obliged to take you to the station.  The
police--think of that," he continued; "think of the disgrace for your
respectable parents; think," he went on, taking Harry by the wrist;
"think of the Colonies and the Day of Judgment."

"I can not help it," wailed Harry.  "It is not my fault.  You will
not come with me to Eaton Place?"

"No," replied the man, "I will not, that is certain.  And I mean to
divide these playthings with you here."

And so saying he applied a sudden and severe torsion to the lad's
wrist.

Harry could not suppress a scream, and the perspiration burst forth
upon his face.  Perhaps pain and terror quickened his intelligence,
but certainly at that moment the whole business flashed across him in
another light; and he saw that there was nothing for it but to accede
to the ruffian's proposal, and trust to find the house and force him
to disgorge, under more favorable circumstances, and when he himself
was clear from all suspicion.  "I agree," he said.

"There is a lamb," sneered the gardener.  "I thought you would
recognize your interests at last.  This bandbox," he continued, "I
shall burn with my rubbish; it is a thing that curious folk might
recognize; and as for you, scrape up your gaieties and put them in
your pocket."

Harry proceeded to obey, Raeburn watching him, and every now and
again, his greed rekindled by some bright scintillation, abstracting
another jewel from the secretary's share, and adding it to his own.

When this was finished, both proceeded to the front door, which
Raeburn cautiously opened to observe the street.  This was apparently
clear of passengers; for he suddenly seized Harry by the nape of the
neck, and holding his face downward so that he could see nothing but
the roadway and the doorsteps of the houses, pushed him violently
before him down one street and up another for the space of perhaps a
minute and a half.  Harry had counted three corners before the bully
relaxed his grasp, and crying, "Now be off with you!" sent the lad
flying headforemost with a well-directed and athletic kick.

When Harry gathered himself up, half-stunned and bleeding freely at
the nose, Mr. Raeburn had entirely disappeared.  For the first time,
anger and pain so completely overcame the lad's spirits that he burst
into a fit of tears and remained sobbing in the middle of the road.

After he had thus somewhat assuaged his emotion, he began to look
about him and read the names of the streets at whose intersection he
had been deserted by the gardener.  He was still in an unfrequented
portion of West London, among villas and large gardens; but he could
see some persons at a window who had evidently witnessed his
misfortune; and almost immediately after a servant came running from
the house and offered him a glass of water.  At the same time, a
dirty rogue, who had been slouching somewhere in the neighborhood,
drew near him from the other side.

"Poor fellow," said the maid, "how vilely you have been handled, to
be sure!  Why, your knees are all cut, and your clothes ruined!  Do
you know the wretch who used you so?"

"That I do!" cried Harry, who was somewhat refreshed by the water;
"and shall run him home in spite of his precautions.  He shall pay
dearly for this day's work, I promise you."

"You had better come into the house and have yourself washed and
brushed," continued the maid.  "My mistress will make you welcome,
never fear.  And see, I will pick up your hat.  Why, love of mercy!"
she screamed, "if you have not dropped diamonds all over the street!"

Such was the case; a good half of what remained to him, after the
depredations of Mr. Raeburn, had been shaken out of his pockets by
the somersault and once more lay glittering on the ground.  He
blessed his fortune that the maid had been so quick of eye; "there is
nothing so bad but it might be worse," thought he; and the recovery
of these few seemed to him almost as great an affair as the loss of
all the rest.  But, alas! as he stooped to pick up his treasures, the
loiterer made a rapid onslaught, overset both Harry and the maid with
a movement of his arms, swept up a double handful of the diamonds,
and made off along the street with an amazing swiftness.

Harry, as soon as he could get upon his feet, gave chase to the
miscreant with many cries, but the latter was too fleet of foot, and
probably too well acquainted with the locality; for turn where the
pursuer would he could find no traces of the fugitive.

In the deepest despondency, Harry revisited the scene of his mishap,
where the maid, who was still waiting, very honestly returned him his
hat and the remainder of the fallen diamonds.  Harry thanked her from
his heart, and being now in no humor for economy, made his way to the
nearest cabstand and set off for Eaton Place by coach.

The house, on his arrival, seemed in some confusion, as if a
catastrophe had happened in the family; and the servants clustered
together in the hall, and were unable, or perhaps not altogether
anxious, to suppress their merriment at the tatterdemalion figure of
the secretary.  He passed them with as good an air of dignity as he
could assume, and made directly for the boudoir.  When he opened the
door an astonishing and even menacing spectacle presented itself to
his eyes; for he beheld the General and his wife, and, of all people,
Charlie Pendragon, closeted together and speaking with earnestness
and gravity on some important subject.  Harry saw at once that there
was little left for him to explain--plenary confession had plainly
been made to the General of the intended fraud upon his pocket, and
the unfortunate miscarriage of the scheme; and they had all made
common cause against a common danger.

"Thank Heaven!" cried Lady Vandeleur, "here he is!  The bandbox,
Harry--the bandbox!"

But Harry stood before them silent and downcast.

"Speak!" she cried.  "Speak!  Where is the bandbox?"

And the men, with threatening gestures, repeated the demand.

Harry drew a handful of jewels from his pocket.  He was very white.

"This is all that remains," said he.  "I declare before Heaven it was
through no fault of mine; and if you will have patience, although
some are lost, I am afraid, forever, others, I am sure, may be still
recovered."

"Alas!" cried Lady Vandeleur, "all our diamonds are gone, and I owe
ninety thousand pounds for dress!"

"Madam," said the General, "you might have paved the gutter with your
own trash; you might have made debts to fifty times the sum you
mention; you might have robbed me of my mother's coronet and ring;
and Nature might have still so far prevailed that I could have
forgiven you at last.  But, madam, you have taken the Rajah's
Diamond--the Eye of Light, as the Orientals poetically termed it--the
Pride of Kashgar!  You have taken from me the Rajah's Diamond," he
cried, raising his hands, "and all, madam, all is at an end between
us!"

"Believe me, General Vandeleur," she replied, "that is one of the
most agreeable speeches that ever I heard from your lips; and since
we are to be ruined, I could almost welcome the change, if it
delivers me from you.  You have told me often enough that I married
you for your money; let me tell you now that I always bitterly
repented the bargain; and if you were still marriageable, and had a
diamond bigger than your head, I should counsel even my maid against
a union so uninviting and disastrous.  As for you, Mr. Hartley," she
continued, turning on the secretary, "you have sufficiently exhibited
your valuable qualities in this house; we are now persuaded that you
equally lack manhood, sense, and self-respect; and I can see only one
course open for you--to withdraw instanter, and, if possible, return
no more.  For your wages you may rank as a creditor in my late
husband's bankruptcy."

Harry had scarcely comprehended this insulting address before the
General was down upon him with another.

"And in the meantime," said that personage, "follow me before the
nearest Inspector of Police.  You may impose upon a simple-minded
soldier, sir, but the eye of the law will read your disreputable
secret.  If I must spend my old age in poverty through your underhand
intriguing with my wife, I mean at least that you shall not remain
unpunished for your pains; and God, sir, will deny me a very
considerable satisfaction if you do not pick oakum from now until
your dying day."

With that, the General dragged Harry from the apartment, and hurried
him downstairs and along the street to the police-station of the
district.


[Here, says my Arabian author, ended this deplorable business of the
bandbox.  But to the unfortunate secretary the whole affair was the
beginning of a new and manlier life.  The police were easily
persuaded of his innocence; and, after he had given what help he
could in the subsequent investigations, he was even complimented by
one of the chiefs of the detective department on the probity and
simplicity of his behavior.  Several persons interested themselves in
one so unfortunate; and soon after he inherited a sum of money from a
maiden aunt in Worcestershire.  With this he married Prudence, and
set sail for Bendigo, or according to another account, for
Trincomalee, exceedingly content, and with the best of prospects.]



STORY OF THE YOUNG MAN IN HOLY ORDERS

The Reverend Mr. Simon Rolles had distinguished himself in the Moral
Sciences, and was more than usually proficient in the study of
Divinity.  His essay "On the Christian Doctrine of the Social
Obligations" obtained for him, at the moment of its production, a
certain celebrity in the University of Oxford; and it was understood
in clerical and learned circles that young Mr. Rolles had in
contemplation a considerable work--a folio, it was said--on the
authority of the Fathers of the Church.  These attainments, these
ambitious designs, however, were far from helping him to any
preferment; and he was still in quest of his first curacy when a
chance ramble in that part of London, the peaceful and rich aspect of
the garden, a desire for solitude and study, and the cheapness of the
lodging, led him to take up his abode with Mr. Raeburn, the
nurseryman of Stockdove Lane.

It was his habit every afternoon, after he had worked seven or eight
hours on St. Ambrose or St. Chrysostom, to walk for a while in
meditation among the roses.  And this was usually one of the most
productive moments of his day.  But even a sincere appetite for
thought, and the excitement of grave problems awaiting solution, are
not always sufficient to preserve the mind of the philosopher against
the petty shocks and contacts of the world.  And when Mr. Rolles
found General Vandeleur's secretary, ragged and bleeding, in the
company of his landlord; when he saw both change color and seek to
avoid his questions; and, above all, when the former denied his own
identity with the most unmoved assurance, he speedily forgot the
Saints and Fathers in the vulgar interest of curiosity.

"I can not be mistaken," thought he.  "That is Mr. Hartley beyond a
doubt.  How comes he in such a pickle? why does he deny his name? and
what can be his business with that black-looking ruffian, my
landlord?"

As he was thus reflecting, another peculiar circumstance attracted
his attention.  The face of Mr. Raeburn appeared at a low window next
the door; and, as chance directed, his eyes met those of Mr. Rolles.
The nurseryman seemed disconcerted, and even alarmed; and immediately
after the blind of the apartment was pulled sharply down.

"This may all be very well," reflected Mr. Rolles; "it may be all
excellently well; but I confess freely that I do not think so.
Suspicious, underhand, untruthful, fearful of observation--I believe
upon my soul," he thought, "the pair are plotting some disgraceful
action."

The detective that there is in all of us awoke and became clamant in
the bosom of Mr. Rolles; and with a brisk, eager step, that bore no
resemblance to his usual gait, he proceeded to make the circuit of
the garden.  When he came to the scene of Harry's escalade, his eye
was at once arrested by a broken rose-bush and marks of trampling on
the mold.  He looked up, and saw scratches on the brick, and a rag of
trouser floating from a broken bottle.  This, then, was the mode of
entrance chosen by Mr. Raeburn's particular friend!  It was thus that
General Vandeleur's secretary came to admire a flower-garden!  The
young clergyman whistled softly to himself as he stooped to examine
the ground.  He could make out where Harry had landed from his
perilous leap; he recognized the flat foot of Mr. Raeburn where it
had sunk deeply in the soil as he pulled up the secretary by the
collar; nay, on a closer inspection, he seemed to distinguish the
marks of groping fingers, as though something had been spilled abroad
and eagerly collected.

"Upon my word," he thought, "the thing grows vastly interesting."

And just then he caught sight of something almost entirely buried in
the earth.  In an instant he had disinterred a dainty morocco case,
ornamented and clasped in gilt.  It had been trodden heavily
underfoot, and thus escaped the hurried search of Mr. Raeburn.  Mr.
Rolles opened the case, and drew a long breath of almost horrified
astonishment; for there lay before him, in a cradle of green velvet,
a diamond of prodigious magnitude and of the finest water.  It was of
the bigness of a duck's egg; beautifully shaped, and without a flaw;
and as the sun shone upon it, it gave forth a lustre like that of
electricity, and seemed to burn in his hand with a thousand internal
fires.

He knew little of precious stones; but the Rajah's Diamond was a
wonder that explained itself; a village child, if he found it, would
run screaming for the nearest cottage; and a savage would prostrate
himself in adoration before so imposing a fetish.  The beauty of the
stone flattered the young clergyman's eyes; the thought of its
incalculable value overpowered his intellect.  He knew that what he
held in his hand was worth more than many years' purchase of an
archiepiscopal see; that it would build cathedrals more stately than
Ely or Cologne; that he who possessed it was set free forever from
the primal curse, and might follow his own inclinations without
concern or hurry, without let or hindrance.  And as he suddenly
turned it, the rays leaped forth again with renewed brilliancy, and
seemed to pierce his very heart.

Decisive actions are often taken in a moment and without any
conscious deliverance from the rational parts of man.  So it was now
with Mr. Rolles.  He glanced hurriedly round; beheld, like Mr.
Raeburn before him, nothing but the sunlit flower-garden, the tall
treetops, and the house with blinded windows; and in a trice he had
shut the case, thrust it into his pocket, and was hastening to his
study with the speed of guilt.

The Reverend Simon Rolles had stolen the Rajah's Diamond.

Early in the afternoon the police arrived with Harry Hartley.  The
nurseryman, who was beside himself with terror, readily discovered
his hoard; and the jewels were identified and inventoried in the
presence of the secretary.  As for Mr. Rolles, he showed himself in a
most obliging temper, communicated what he knew with freedom, and
professed regret that he could do no more to help the officers in
their duty.

"Still," he added, "I suppose your business is nearly at an end."

"By no means," replied the man from Scotland Yard; and he narrated
the second robbery of which Harry had been the immediate victim, and
gave the young clergyman a description of the more important jewels
that were still not found, dilating particularly on the Rajah's
Diamond.

"It must be worth a fortune," observed Mr. Rolles.

"Ten fortunes--twenty fortunes," cried the officer.

"The more it is worth," remarked Simon shrewdly, "the more difficult
it must be to sell.  Such a thing has a physiognomy not to be
disguised, and I should fancy a man might as easily negotiate St.
Paul's Cathedral."

"Oh, truly!" said the officer; "but if the thief be a man of any
intelligence, he will cut it into three or four, and there will be
still enough to make him rich."

"Thank you," said the clergyman.  "You can not imagine how much your
conversation interests me."

Whereupon the functionary admitted that they knew many strange things
in his profession, and immediately after took his leave.

Mr. Rolles regained his apartment.  It seemed smaller and barer than
usual; the materials for his great work had never presented so little
interest; and he looked upon his library with the eye of scorn.  He
took down, volume by volume, several Fathers of the Church, and
glanced them through; but they contained nothing to his purpose.

"These old gentlemen," thought he, "are no doubt very valuable
writers, but they seem to me conspicuously ignorant of life.  Here am
I, with learning enough to be a Bishop, and I positively do not know
how to dispose of a stolen diamond.  I glean a hint from a common
policeman, and, with all my folios, I can not so much as put it into
execution.  This inspires me with very low ideas of University
training."

Herewith he kicked over his book-shelf and, putting on his hat,
hastened from the house to the club of which he was a member.  In
such a place of mundane resort he hoped to find some man of good
counsel and a shrewd experience in life.  In the reading-room he saw
many of the country clergy and an Archdeacon; there were three
journalists and a writer upon the Higher Metaphysic, playing pool;
and at dinner only the raff of ordinary club frequenters showed their
commonplace and obliterated countenances.  None of these, thought Mr.
Rolles, would know more on dangerous topics than he knew himself;
none of them were fit to give him guidance in his present strait.  At
length, in the smoking-room, up many weary stairs, he hit upon a
gentleman of somewhat portly build and dressed with conspicuous
plainness.  He was smoking a cigar and reading the "Fortnightly
Review"; his face was singularly free from all sign of preoccupation
or fatigue; and there was something in his air which seemed to invite
confidence and to expect submission.  The more the young clergyman
scrutinized his features, the more he was convinced that he had
fallen on one capable of giving pertinent advice.

"Sir," said he, "you will excuse my abruptness; but I judge you from
your appearance to be preeminently a man of the world."

"I have indeed considerable claims to that distinction," replied the
stranger, laying aside his magazine with a look of mingled amusement
and surprise.

"I, sir," continued the Curate, "am a recluse, a student, a creature
of ink-bottles and patristic folios.  A recent event has brought my
folly vividly before my eyes, and I desire to instruct myself in
life.  By life," he added, "I do not mean Thackeray's novels; but the
crimes and secret possibilities of our society, and the principles of
wise conduct among exceptional events.  I am a patient reader; can
the thing be learned in books?"

"You put me in a difficulty," said the stranger.  "I confess I have
no great notion of the use of books, except to amuse a railway
journey; although, I believe, there are some very exact treatises on
astronomy, the use of the globes, agriculture, and the art of making
paper-flowers.  Upon the less apparent provinces of life I fear you
will find nothing truthful.  Yet stay," he added, "have you read
Gaboriau?"

Mr. Rolles admitted he had never even heard the name.

"You may gather some notions from Gaboriau," resumed the stranger.
"He is at least suggestive; and as he is an author much studied by
Prince Bismarck, you will, at the worst, lose your time in good
society."

"Sir," said the Curate, "I am infinitely obliged by your politeness."

"You have already more than repaid me," returned the other.

"How?" inquired Simon.

"By the novelty of your request," replied the gentleman; and with a
polite gesture, as though to ask permission, he resumed the study of
the "Fortnightly Review."

On his way home Mr. Rolles purchased a work on precious stones and
several of Gaboriau's novels.  These last he eagerly skimmed until an
advanced hour in the morning; but although they introduced him to
many new ideas, he could nowhere discover what to do with a stolen
diamond.  He was annoyed, moreover, to find the information scattered
among romantic story-telling, instead of soberly set forth after the
manner of a manual; and he concluded that, even if the writer had
thought much upon these subjects, he was totally lacking in
educational method.  For the character and attainments of Lecoq,
however, he was unable to contain his admiration.

"He was truly a great creature," ruminated Mr. Rolles.  "He knew the
world as I know Paley's Evidences.  There was nothing that he could
not carry to a termination with his own hand, and against the largest
odds.  Heavens!" he broke out suddenly, "is not this the lesson?
Must I not learn to cut diamonds for myself?"

It seemed to him as if he had sailed at once out of his perplexities;
he remembered that he knew a jeweler, one B. Macculloch, in
Edinburgh, who would be glad to put him in the way of the necessary
training; a few months, perhaps a few years, of sordid toil, and he
would be sufficiently expert to divide and sufficiently cunning to
dispose with advantage of the Rajah's Diamond.  That done, he might
return to pursue his researches at leisure, a wealthy and luxurious
student, envied and respected by all.  Golden visions attended him
through his slumber, and he awoke refreshed and light-hearted with
the morning sun.

Mr. Raeburn's house was on that day to be closed by the police, and
this afforded a pretext for his departure.  He cheerfully prepared
his baggage, transported it to King's Cross, where he left it in the
cloak room, and returned to the club to while away the afternoon and
dine.

"If you dine here to-day, Rolles," observed an acquaintance, "you may
see two of the most remarkable men in England--Prince Florizel of
Bohemia and old Jack Vandeleur."

"I have heard of the Prince," replied Mr. Rolles; "and General
Vandeleur I have even met in society."

"General Vandeleur is an ass!" returned the other.  "This is his
brother John, the biggest adventurer, the best judge of precious
stones, and one of the most acute diplomatists in Europe.  Have you
never heard of his duel with the Duc de Val d'Orge? of his exploits
and atrocities when he was Dictator of Paraguay? of his dexterity in
recovering Sir Samuel Levi's jewelry? nor of his services in the
Indian Mutiny--services by which the Government profited, but which
the Government dared not recognize?  You make me wonder what we mean
by fame, or even by infamy; for Jack Vandeleur has prodigious claims
to both.  Run downstairs," he continued, "take a table near them, and
keep your ears open.  You will hear some strange talk, or I am much
misled."

"But how shall I know them?" inquired the clergyman.

"Know them!" cried his friend; "why, the Prince is the finest
gentleman in Europe, the only living creature who looks like a king;
and as for Jack Vandeleur, if you can imagine Ulysses at seventy
years of age, and with a sabre-cut across his face, you have the man
before you!  Know them, indeed!  Why, you could pick either of them
out of a Derby day!"

Rolles eagerly hurried to the dining-room.  It was as his friend had
asserted; it was impossible to mistake the pair in question.  Old
John Vandeleur was of a remarkable force of body, and obviously
broken to the most difficult exercises.  He had neither the carriage
of a swordsman, nor of a sailor, nor yet of one much inured to the
saddle; but something made up of all these, and the result and
expression of many different habits and dexterities.  His features
were bold and aquiline; his expression arrogant and predatory; his
whole appearance that of a swift, violent, unscrupulous man of
action; and his copious white hair and the deep sabre-cut that
traversed his nose and temple added a note of savagery to a head
already remarkable and menacing in itself.

In his companion, the Prince of Bohemia, Mr. Rolles was astonished to
recognize the gentleman who had recommended him the study of
Gaboriau.  Doubtless Prince Florizel, who rarely visited the club, of
which, as of most others, he was an honorary member, had been waiting
for John Vandeleur when Simon accosted him on the previous evening.

The other diners had modestly retired into the angles of the room,
and left the distinguished pair in a certain isolation, but the young
clergyman was unrestrained by any sentiment of awe, and, marching
boldly up, took his place at the nearest table.

The conversation was, indeed, new to the student's ears.  The
ex-Dictator of Paraguay stated many extraordinary experiences in
different quarters of the world; and the Prince supplied a commentary
which, to a man of thought, was even more interesting than the events
themselves.  Two forms of experience were thus brought together and
laid before the young clergyman; and he did not know which to admire
the most--the desperate actor, or the skilled expert in life; the man
who spoke boldly of his own deeds and perils, or the man who seemed,
like a god, to know all things and to have suffered nothing.  The
manner of each aptly fitted with his part in the discourse.  The
Dictator indulged in brutalities alike of speech and gesture; his
hand opened and shut and fell roughly on the table; and his voice was
loud and heady.  The Prince, on the other hand, seemed the very type
of urbane docility and quiet; the least movement, the least
inflection, had with him a weightier significance than all the shouts
and pantomime of his companion; and if ever, as must frequently have
been the case, he described some experience personal to himself, it
was so aptly dissimulated as to pass unnoticed with the rest.

At length the talk wandered on to the late robberies and the Rajah's
Diamond.

"That diamond would be better in the sea," observed Prince Florizel.

"As a Vandeleur," replied the Dictator, "your Highness may imagine my
dissent."

"I speak on grounds of public policy," pursued the Prince.  "Jewels
so valuable should be reserved for the collection of a Prince or the
treasury of a great nation.  To hand them about among the common sort
of men is to set a price on Virtue's head; and if the Rajah of
Kashgar--a Prince, I understand, of great enlightenment--desired
vengeance upon the men of Europe, he could hardly have gone more
efficaciously about his purpose than by sending us this apple of
discord.  There is no honesty too robust for such a trial.  I myself,
who have many duties and many privileges of my own--I myself, Mr.
Vandeleur, could scarce handle the intoxicating crystal and be safe.
As for you, who are a diamond-hunter by taste and profession, I do
not believe there is a crime in the calendar you would not
perpetrate--I do not believe you have a friend in the world whom you
would not eagerly betray--I do not know if you have a family, but if
you have I declare you would sacrifice your children--and all this
for what?  Not to be richer, nor to have more comforts or more
respect, but simply to call this diamond yours for a year or two
until you die, and now and again to open a safe and look at it as one
looks at a picture."

"It is true," replied Vandeleur.  "I have hunted most things, from
men and women down to mosquitoes; I have dived for coral; I have
followed both whales and tigers; and a diamond is the tallest quarry
of the lot.  It has beauty and worth; it alone can properly reward
the ardors of the chase.  At this moment, as your Highness may fancy,
I am upon the trail; I have a sure knack, a wide experience; I know
every stone of price in my brother's collection as a shepherd knows
his sheep; and I wish I may die if I do not recover them every one!"

"Sir Thomas Vandeleur will have great cause to thank you," said the
Prince.

"I am not so sure," returned the Dictator, with a laugh.  "One of the
Vandeleurs will.  Thomas or John--Peter or Paul--we are all apostles."

"I did not catch your observation," said the Prince with some disgust.

And at the same moment the waiter informed Mr. Vandeleur that his cab
was at the door.

Mr. Rolles glanced at the clock, and saw that he also must be moving;
and the coincidence struck him sharply and unpleasantly, for he
desired to see no more of the diamond-hunter.

Much study having somewhat shaken the young man's nerves, he was in
the habit of traveling in the most luxurious manner; and for the
present journey he had taken a sofa in the sleeping carriage.

"You will be very comfortable," said the guard; "there is no one in
your compartment, and only one old gentleman in the other end."

It was close upon the hour, and the tickets were being examined, when
Mr. Rolles beheld this other fellow-passenger ushered by several
porters into his place; certainly, there was not another man in the
world whom he would not have preferred--for it was old John
Vandeleur, the ex-Dictator.

The sleeping carriages on the Great Northern line were divided into
three compartments--one at each end for travelers, and one in the
centre fitted with the conveniences of a lavatory.  A door running in
grooves separated each of the others from the lavatory; but as there
were neither bolts nor locks, the whole suite was practically common
ground.

When Mr. Rolles had studied his position, he perceived himself
without defense.  If the Dictator chose to pay him a visit in the
course of the night, he could do no less than receive it; he had no
means of fortification, and lay open to attack as if he had been
lying in the fields.  This situation caused him some agony of mind.
He recalled with alarm the boastful statements of his fellow-traveler
across the dining-table, and the professions of immorality which he
had heard him offering to the disgusted Prince.  Some persons, he
remembered to have read, are endowed with a singular quickness of
perception for the neighborhood of precious metals; through walls and
even at considerable distances they are said to divine the presence
of gold.  Might it not be the same with diamonds? he wondered; and if
so, who was more likely to enjoy this transcendental sense than the
person who gloried in the appellation of the Diamond Hunter?  From
such a man he recognized that he had everything to fear, and longed
eagerly for the arrival of the day.

In the meantime he neglected no precaution, concealed his diamond in
the most internal pocket of a system of greatcoats, and devoutly
recommended himself to the care of Providence.

The train pursued its usual even and rapid course; and nearly half
the journey had been accomplished before slumber began to triumph
over uneasiness in the breast of Mr. Rolles.  For some time he
resisted its influence; but it grew upon him more and more, and a
little before York he was fain to stretch himself upon one of the
couches and suffer his eyes to close; and almost at the same instant
consciousness deserted the young clergyman.  His last thought was of
his terrifying neighbor.

When he awoke it was still pitch dark except for the flicker of the
veiled lamp; and the continual roaring and oscillation testified to
the unrelaxed velocity of the train.  He sat upright in a panic, for
he had been tormented by the most uneasy dreams; it was some seconds
before he recovered his self-command; and even after he had resumed a
recumbent attitude sleep continued to flee him, and he lay awake with
his brain in a state of violent agitation, and his eyes fixed upon
the lavatory door.  He pulled his clerical felt hat over his brow
still further to shield him from the light; and he adopted the usual
expedients, such as counting a thousand or banishing thought, by
which experienced invalids are accustomed to woo the approach of
sleep.  In the case of Mr. Rolles they proved one and all vain; he
was harassed by a dozen different anxieties--the old man in the other
end of the carriage haunted him in the most alarming shapes; and in
whatever attitude he chose to lie the diamond in his pocket
occasioned him a sensible physical distress.  It burned, it was too
large, it bruised his ribs; and there were infinitesimal fractions of
a second in which he had half a mind to throw it from the window.

While he was thus lying, a strange incident took place.

The sliding-door into the lavatory stirred a little, and then a
little more, and was finally drawn back for the space of about twenty
inches.  The lamp in the lavatory was unshaded, and in the lighted
aperture thus disclosed Mr. Rolles could see the head of Mr.
Vandeleur in an attitude of deep attention.  He was conscious that
the gaze of the Dictator rested intently on his own face and the
instinct of self-preservation moved him to hold his breath, to
refrain from the least movement, and keeping his eyes lowered, to
watch his visitor from underneath the lashes.  After about a moment
the head was withdrawn and the door of the lavatory replaced.

The Dictator had not come to attack, but to observe; his action was
not that of a man threatening another, but that of a man who was
himself threatened; if Mr. Rolles was afraid of him, it appeared that
he, in his turn, was not quite easy on the score of Mr. Rolles.  He
had come, it would seem, to make sure that his only fellow-traveler
was asleep; and, when satisfied on that point, he had at once
withdrawn.

The clergyman leaped to his feet.  The extreme of terror had given
place to a reaction of foolhardy daring.  He reflected that the
rattle of the flying train concealed all other sounds, and
determined, come what might, to return the visit he had just
received.  Divesting himself of his cloak, which might have
interfered with the freedom of his action, he entered the lavatory
and paused to listen.  As he had expected, there was nothing to be
heard above the roar of the train's progress; and laying his hand on
the door at the further side, he proceeded cautiously to draw it back
for about six inches.  Then he stopped, and could not contain an
ejaculation of surprise.

John Vandeleur wore a fur traveling cap with lappets to protect his
ears; and this may have combined with the sound of the express to
keep him in ignorance of what was going forward.  It is certain, at
least, that he did not raise his head, but continued without
interruption to pursue his strange employment.  Between his feet
stood an open hat-box; in one hand he held the sleeve of his sealskin
greatcoat; in the other a formidable knife, with which he had just
slit up the lining of the sleeve.  Mr. Rolles had read of persons
carrying money in a belt; and as he had no acquaintance with any but
cricket-belts, he had never been able rightly to conceive how this
was managed.  But here was a stranger thing before his eyes; for John
Vandeleur, it appeared, carried diamonds in the lining of his sleeve;
and even as the young clergyman gazed, he could see one glittering
brilliant drop after another into the hat-box.

He stood riveted to the spot, following this unusual business with
his eyes.  The diamonds were, for the most part, small, and not
easily distinguishable either in shape or fire.  Suddenly the
Dictator appeared to find a difficulty; he employed both hands and
stopped over his task; but it was not until after considerable
maneuvring that he extricated a large tiara of diamonds from the
lining, and held it up for some seconds' examination before he placed
it with the others in the hat-box.  The tiara was a ray of light to
Mr. Rolles; he immediately recognized it for a part of the treasure
stolen from Harry Hartley by the loiterer.  There was no room for
mistake; it was exactly as the detective had described it; there were
the ruby stars, with a great emerald in the centre; there were the
interlacing crescents; and there were the pear-shaped pendants, each
a single stone, which gave a special value to Lady Vandeleur's tiara.

Mr. Rolles was hugely relieved.  The Dictator was as deeply in the
affair as he was; neither could tell tales upon the other.  In the
first glow of happiness, the clergyman suffered a deep sigh to escape
him; and as his bosom had become choked and his throat dry during his
previous suspense, the sigh was followed by a cough.

Mr. Vandeleur looked up; his face contracted with the blackest and
most deadly passion; his eyes opened widely, and his under jaw
dropped in an astonishment that was upon the brink of fury.  By an
instinctive movement he had covered the hat-box with the coat.  For
half a minute the two men stared upon each other in silence.  It was
not a long interval, but it sufficed for Mr. Rolles; he was one of
those who think swiftly on dangerous occasions; he decided on a
course of action of a singularly daring nature; and although he felt
he was setting his life upon the hazard, he was the first to break
silence.

"I beg your pardon," said he.

The Dictator shivered slightly, and when he spoke his voice was
hoarse.

"What do you want here?" he asked.

"I take a particular interest in diamonds," replied Mr. Rolles, with
an air of perfect self-possession.  "Two connoisseurs should be
acquainted.  I have here a trifle of my own which may perhaps serve
for an introduction."

And so saying, he quietly took the case from his pocket, showed the
Rajah's Diamond to the Dictator for an instant, and replaced it in
security.

"It was once your brother's," he added.

John Vandeleur continued to regard him with a look of almost painful
amazement; but he neither spoke nor moved.

"I was pleased to observe," resumed the young man, "that we have gems
from the same collection."

The Dictator's surprise overpowered him.

"I beg your pardon," he said; "I begin to perceive that I am growing
old!  I am positively not prepared for little incidents like this.
But set my mind at rest upon one point: do my eyes deceive me, or are
you indeed a parson?"

"I am in holy orders," answered Mr. Rolles.

"Well," cried the other, "as long as I live I will never hear another
word against the cloth!"

"You flatter me," said Mr. Rolles.

"Pardon me," replied Vandeleur; "pardon me, young man.  You are no
coward, but it still remains to be seen whether you are not the worst
of fools.  Perhaps," he continued, leaning back upon his seat,
"perhaps you would oblige me with a few particulars.  I must suppose
you had some object in the stupefying impudence of your proceedings,
and I confess I have a curiosity to know it."

"It is very simple," replied the clergyman; "it proceeds from my
great inexperience of life."

"I shall be glad to be persuaded," answered Vandeleur.

Whereupon Mr. Rolles told him the whole story of his connection with
the Rajah's Diamond, from the time he found it in Raeburn's garden to
the time when he left London in the Flying Scotchman.  He added a
brief sketch of his feelings and thoughts during the journey, and
concluded in these words:

"When I recognized the tiara I knew we were in the same attitude
toward Society, and this inspired me with a hope, which I trust you
will say was not ill-founded, that you might become in some sense my
partner in the difficulties and, of course, the profits of my
situation.  To one of your special knowledge and obviously great
experience the negotiation of the diamond would give but little
trouble, while to me it was a matter of impossibility.  On the other
part, I judged that I might lose nearly as much by cutting the
diamond, and that not improbably with an unskilful hand, as might
enable me to pay you with proper generosity for your assistance.  The
subject was a delicate one to broach; and perhaps I fell short in
delicacy.  But I must ask you to remember that for me the situation
was a new one, and I was entirely unacquainted with the etiquette in
use.  I believe without vanity that I could have married or baptized
you in a very acceptable manner; but every man has his own aptitudes,
and this sort of bargain was not among the list of my
accomplishments."

"I do not wish to flatter you," replied Vandeleur; "but, upon my
word, you have an unusual disposition for a life of crime.  You have
more accomplishments than you imagine; and though I have encountered
a number of rogues in different quarters of the world, I never met
with one so unblushing as yourself.  Cheer up, Mr. Rolles, you are in
the right profession at last!  As for helping you, you may command me
as you will.  I have only a day's business in Edinburgh on a little
matter for my brother; and once that is concluded, I return to Paris,
where I usually reside.  If you please you may accompany me thither.
And before the end of a month I believe I shall have brought your
little business to a satisfactory conclusion."


[At this point, contrary to all the canons of his art, our Arabian
Author breaks off the "Story of the Young Man in Holy Orders."  I
regret and condemn such practises; but I must follow my original, and
refer the reader for the conclusion of Mr. Rolles's adventures to the
next number of the cycle, the "Story of the House with the Green
Blinds."]



STORY OF THE HOUSE WITH THE GREEN BLINDS

Francis Scrymgeour, a clerk in the Bank of Scotland at Edinburgh, had
attained the age of twenty-five in a sphere of quiet, creditable, and
domestic life.  His mother died while he was young; but his father, a
man of sense and probity, had given him an excellent education at
school, and brought him up at home to orderly and frugal habits.
Francis, who was of a docile and affectionate disposition, profited
by these advantages with zeal, and devoted himself heart and soul to
his employment.  A walk upon Saturday afternoon, an occasional dinner
with members of his family, and a yearly tour of a fortnight in the
Highlands or even on the continent of Europe, were his principal
distractions, and he grew rapidly in favor with his superiors, and
enjoyed already a salary of nearly two hundred pounds a year, with
the prospect of an ultimate advance to almost double that amount.
Few young men were more contented, few more willing and laborious,
than Francis Scrymgeour.  Sometimes at night, when he had read the
daily paper, he would play upon the flute to amuse his father, for
whose qualities he entertained a great respect.

One day he received a note from a well-known firm of Writers to the
Signet, requesting the favor of an immediate interview with him.  The
letter was marked "Private and Confidential," and had been addressed
to him at the bank, instead of at home--two unusual circumstances
which made him obey the summons with the more alacrity.  The senior
member of the firm, a man of much austerity of manner, made him
gravely welcome, requested him to take a seat, and proceeded to
explain the matter in hand in the picked expressions of a veteran man
of business.  A person, who must remain nameless, but of whom the
lawyer had every reason to think well--a man, in short, of some
station in the country--desired to make Francis an annual allowance
of five hundred pounds.  The capital was to be placed under the
control of the lawyer's firm and two trustees who must also remain
anonymous.  There were conditions annexed to this liberality, but he
was of opinion that his new client would find nothing either
excessive or dishonorable in the terms; and he repeated these two
words with emphasis, as though he desired to commit himself to
nothing more.

Francis asked their nature.

"The conditions," said the Writer to the Signet, "are, as I have
twice remarked, neither dishonorable nor excessive.  At the same time
I can not conceal from you that they are most unusual.  Indeed, the
whole case is very much out of our way; and I should certainly have
refused it had it not been for the reputation of the gentleman who
entrusted it to my care, and, let me add, Mr. Scrymgeour, the
interest I have been led to take in yourself by many complimentary
and, I have no doubt, well-deserved reports."

Francis entreated him to be more specific.

"You can not picture my uneasiness as to these conditions," he said.

"They are two," replied the lawyer, "only two; and the sum, as you
will remember, is five hundred a year--and unburdened, I forgot to
add, unburdened."

And the lawyer raised his eyebrows at him with solemn gusto.

"The first," he resumed, "is of remarkable simplicity.  You must be
in Paris by the afternoon of Sunday, the 15th; there you will find,
at the box-office of the Comedie Fran√ßaise, a ticket for admission
taken in your name and waiting you.  You are requested to sit out the
whole performance in the seat provided, and that is all."

"I should certainly have preferred a week-day," replied Francis.
"But, after all, once in a way--"

"And in Paris, my dear sir," added the lawyer, soothingly.  "I
believe I am something of a precisian myself, but upon such a
consideration, and in Paris, I should not hesitate an instant."

And the pair laughed pleasantly together.

"The other is of more importance," continued the Writer to the
Signet.  "It regards your marriage.  My client, taking a deep
interest in your welfare, desires to advise you absolutely in the
choice of a wife.  Absolutely, you understand," he repeated.

"Let us be more explicit, if you please," returned Francis.  "Am I to
marry any one, maid or widow, black or white, whom this invisible
person chooses to propose?"

"I was to assure you that suitability of age and position should be a
principle with your benefactor," replied the lawyer.  "As to race, I
confess the difficulty had not occurred to me, and I failed to
inquire; but if you like I will make a note of it at once, and advise
you on the earliest opportunity."

"Sir," said Francis, "it remains to be seen whether this whole affair
is not a most unworthy fraud.  The circumstances are inexplicable--I
had almost said incredible; and until I see a little more daylight,
and some plausible motive, I confess I should be very sorry to put a
hand to the transaction.  I appeal to you in this difficulty for
information.  I must learn what is at the bottom of it all.  If you
do not know, can not guess, or are not at liberty to tell me, I shall
take my hat and go back to my bank as I came."

"I do not know," answered the lawyer, "but I have an excellent guess.
Your father, and no one else, is at the root of this apparently
unnatural business."

"My father!" cried Francis, in extreme disdain.  "Worthy man, I know
every thought of his mind, every penny of his fortune!"

"You misinterpret my words," said the lawyer.  "I do not refer to Mr.
Scrymgeour, senior; for he is not your father.  When he and his wife
came to Edinburgh, you were already nearly one year old, and you had
not yet been three months in their care.  The secret has been well
kept; but such is the fact.  Your father is unknown, and I say again
that I believe him to be the original of the offers I am charged at
present to transmit to you."

It would be impossible to exaggerate the astonishment of Francis
Scrymgeour at this unexpected information.  He pleaded this confusion
to the lawyer.

"Sir," said he, "after a piece of news so startling, you must grant
me some hours for thought.  You shall know this evening what
conclusion I have reached."

The lawyer commended his prudence; and Francis, excusing himself upon
some pretext at the bank, took a long walk into the country, and
fully considered the different steps and aspects of the case.  A
pleasant sense of his own importance rendered him the more
deliberate: but the issue was from the first not doubtful.  His whole
carnal man leaned irresistibly toward the five hundred a year, and
the strange conditions with which it was burdened; he discovered in
his heart an invincible repugnance to the name of Scrymgeour, which
he had never hitherto disliked; he began to despise the narrow and
unromantic interests of his former life; and when once his mind was
fairly made up, he walked with a new feeling of strength and freedom,
and nourished himself with the gayest anticipations.

He said but a word to the lawyer, and immediately received a check
for two quarters' arrears; for the allowance was antedated from the
first of January.  With this in his pocket, he walked home.  The flat
in Scotland Street looked mean in his eyes; his nostrils, for the
first time, rebelled against the odor of broth; and he observed
little defects of manner in his adoptive father which filled him with
surprise and almost with disgust.  The next day, he determined,
should see him on his way to Paris.

In that city, where he arrived long before the appointed date, he put
up at a modest hotel frequented by English and Italians, and devoted
himself to improvement in the French tongue; for this purpose he had
a master twice a week, entered into conversation with loiterers in
the Champs Elys√©es, and nightly frequented the theatre.  He had his
whole toilet fashionably renewed; and was shaved and had his hair
dressed every morning by a barber in a neighboring street.  This gave
him something of a foreign air, and seemed to wipe off the reproach
of his past years.

At length, on the Saturday afternoon, he betook himself to the
box-office of the theatre in the Rue Richelieu.  No sooner had he
mentioned his name than the clerk produced the order in an envelope
of which the address was scarcely dry.

"It has been taken this moment," said the clerk.

"Indeed!" said Francis.  "May I ask what the gentleman was like?"

"Your friend is easy to describe," replied the official.  "He is old
and strong and beautiful, with white hair and a sabre-cut across his
face.  You can not fail to recognize so marked a person."

"No, indeed," returned Francis; "and I thank you for your politeness."

"He can not yet be far distant," added the clerk.  "If you make haste
you might still overtake him."

Francis did not wait to be twice told; he ran precipitately from the
theatre into the middle of the street and looked in all directions.
More than one white-haired man was within sight; but though he
overtook each of them in succession, all wanted the sabre-cut.  For
nearly half an hour he tried one street after another in the
neighborhood, until at length, recognizing the folly of continued
search, he started on a walk to compose his agitated feelings; for
this proximity of an encounter with him to whom he could not doubt he
owed the day had profoundly moved the young man.

It chanced that his way lay up the Rue Drouot and thence up the Rue
des Martyrs; and chance, in this case, served him better than all the
forethought in the world.  For on the outer boulevard he saw two men
in earnest colloquy upon a seat.  One was dark, young, and handsome,
secularly dressed, but with an indelible clerical stamp; the other
answered in every particular to the description given him by the
clerk.  Francis felt his heart beat high in his bosom; he knew he was
now about to hear the voice of his father; and making a wide circuit,
he noiselessly took his place behind the couple in question, who were
too much interested in their talk to observe much else.  As Francis
had expected, the conversation was conducted in the English language.

"Your suspicions begin to annoy me, Rolles," said the older man.  "I
tell you I am doing my utmost; a man can not lay his hand on millions
in a moment.  Have I not taken you up, a mere stranger, out of pure
goodwill?  Are you not living largely on my bounty?"

"On your advances, Mr. Vandeleur," corrected the other.

"Advances, if you choose; and interest instead of good-will, if you
prefer it," returned Vandeleur, angrily.  "I am not here to pick
expressions.  Business is business; and your business, let me remind
you, is too muddy for such airs.  Trust me, or leave me alone and
find some one else; but let us have an end, for God's sake, of your
jeremiads."

"I am beginning to learn the world," replied the other, "and I see
that you have every reason to play me false, and not one to deal
honestly.  I am not here to pick expressions, either; you wish the
diamond for yourself; you know you do--you dare not deny it.  Have
you not already forged my name, and searched my lodging in my
absence?  I understand the cause of your delays; you are lying in
wait; you are the diamond-hunter, forsooth; and sooner or later, by
fair means or foul, you'll lay your hands upon it.  I tell you, it
must stop; push me much further and I promise you a surprise."

"It does not become you to use threats," returned Vandeleur.  "Two
can play at that.  My brother is here in Paris; the police are on the
alert; and if you persist in wearying me with your caterwauling, I
will arrange a little astonishment for you, Mr. Rolles.  But mine
shall be once and for all.  Do you understand, or would you prefer me
to tell it you in Hebrew?  There is an end to all things, and you
have come to the end of my patience.  Tuesday, at seven; not a day,
not an hour sooner, not the least part of a second, if it were to
save your life.  And if you do not choose to wait, you may go to the
bottomless pit for me, and welcome."

And so saying, the Dictator arose from the bench, and marched off in
the direction of Montmartre, shaking his head and swinging his cane
with a most furious air; while his companion remained where he was,
in an attitude of great dejection.

Francis was at the pitch of surprise and horror; his sentiments had
been shocked to the last degree; the hopeful tenderness with which he
had taken his place upon the bench was transformed into repulsion and
despair; old Mr. Scrymgeour, he reflected, was a far more kindly and
creditable parent than this dangerous and violent intriguer; but he
retained his presence of mind, and suffered not a moment to elapse
before he was on the trail of the Dictator.

That gentleman's fury carried him forward at a brisk pace, and he was
so completely occupied in his angry thoughts that he never so much as
cast a look behind him till he reached his own door.

His house stood high up in the Rue Lepic, commanding a view of all
Paris and enjoying the pure air of the heights.  It was two stories
high, with green blinds and shutters; and all the windows looking on
the street were hermetically closed.  Tops of trees showed over the
high garden wall, and the wall was protected by chevaux-de-frise.
The Dictator paused a moment while he searched his pocket for a key;
and then, opening a gate, disappeared within the enclosure.

Francis looked about him; the neighborhood was very lonely; the house
isolated in its garden.  It seemed as if his observation must here
come to an abrupt end.  A second glance, however, showed him a tall
house next door presenting a gable to the garden, and in this gable a
single window.  He passed to the front and saw a ticket offering
unfurnished lodgings by the month; and, on inquiry, the room which
commanded the Dictator's garden proved to be one of those to let.
Francis did not hesitate a moment; he took the room, paid an advance
upon the rent, and returned to his hotel to seek his baggage.

The old man with the sabre-cut might or might not be his father; he
might or he might not be upon the true scent; but he was certainly on
the edge of an exciting mystery, and he promised himself that he
would not relax his observation until he had got to the bottom of the
secret.

From the window of his new apartment Francis Scrymgeour commanded a
complete view into the garden of the house with the green blinds.
Immediately below him a very comely chestnut with wide boughs
sheltered a pair of rustic tables where people might dine in the
height of summer.  On all sides save one a dense vegetation concealed
the soil; but there, between the tables and the house, he saw a patch
of gravel walk leading from the veranda to the garden gate.  Studying
the place from between the boards of the Venetian shutters, which he
durst not open for fear of attracting attention, Francis observed but
little to indicate the manners of the inhabitants, and that little
argued no more than a close reserve and a taste for solitude.  The
garden was conventual, the house had the air of a prison.  The green
blinds were all drawn down upon the outside; the door into the
veranda was closed; the garden, as far as he could see it, was left
entirely to itself in the evening sunshine.  A modest curl of smoke
from a single chimney alone testified to the presence of living
people.

In order that he might not be entirely idle, and to give a certain
color to his way of life, Francis had purchased Euclid's Geometry in
French, which he set himself to copy and translate on the top of his
portmanteau and seated on the floor against the wall; for he was
equally without chair or table.  From time to time he would rise and
cast a glance into the enclosure of the house with the green blinds;
but the windows remained obstinately closed and the garden empty.

Only late in the evening did anything occur to reward his continued
attention.  Between nine and ten the sharp tinkle of a bell aroused
him from a fit of dozing; and he sprang to his observatory in time to
hear an important noise of locks being opened and bars removed, and
to see Mr. Vandeleur, carrying a lantern and clothed in a flowing
robe of black velvet with a skull-cap to match, issue from under the
veranda and proceed leisurely toward the garden gate.  The sound of
bolts and bars was then repeated; and a moment after Francis
perceived the Dictator escorting into the house, in the mobile light
of the lantern, an individual of the lowest and most despicable
appearance.

Half an hour afterward the visitor was reconducted to the street; and
Mr. Vandeleur, setting his light upon one of the rustic tables,
finished a cigar with great deliberation under the foliage of the
chestnut.  Francis, peering through a clear space among the leaves,
was able to follow his gestures as he threw away the ash or enjoyed a
copious inhalation; and beheld a cloud upon the old man's brow and a
forcible action of the lips which testified to some deep and probably
painful train of thought.  The cigar was already almost at an end,
when the voice of a young girl was heard suddenly crying the hour
from the interior of the house.

"In a moment," replied John Vandeleur.

And, with that, he threw away the stump and, taking up the lantern,
sailed away under the veranda for the night.  As soon as the door was
closed, absolute darkness fell upon the house.  Francis might try his
eyesight as much as he pleased, he could not detect so much as a
single chink of light below a blind; and he concluded, with great
good sense, that the bedchambers were all upon the other side.

Early the next morning (for he was early awake after an uncomfortable
night upon the floor), he saw cause to adopt a different explanation.
The blinds rose, one after another, by means of a spring in the
interior, and disclosed steel shutters such as we see on the front of
shops; these in their turn were rolled up by a similar contrivance;
and, for the space of about an hour, the chambers were left open to
the morning air.  At the end of that time Mr. Vandeleur, with his own
hand, once more closed the shutters and replaced the blinds from
within.

While Francis was still marveling at these precautions, the door
opened and a young girl came forth to look about her in the garden.
It was not two minutes before she reentered the house, but even in
that short time he saw enough to convince him that she possessed the
most unusual attractions.  His curiosity was not only highly excited
by this incident, but his spirits were improved to a still more
notable degree.  The alarming manners and more than equivocal life of
his father ceased from that moment to prey upon his mind; from that
moment he embraced his new family with ardor; and whether the young
lady should prove his sister or his wife, he felt convinced she was
an angel in disguise.  So much was this the case that he was seized
with a sudden horror when he reflected how little he really knew, and
how possible it was that he had followed the wrong person when he
followed Mr. Vandeleur.

The porter, whom he consulted, could afford him little information;
but, such as it was, it had a mysterious and questionable sound.  The
person next door was an English gentleman of extraordinary wealth,
and proportionately eccentric in his tastes and habits.  He possessed
great collections, which he kept in the house beside him; and it was
to protect these that he had fitted the place with steel shutters,
elaborate fastenings, and chevaux-de-frise along the garden wall.  He
lived much alone, in spite of some strange visitors with whom, it
seemed, he had business to transact; and there was no one else in the
house, except Mademoiselle and an old woman servant.

"Is Mademoiselle his daughter?" inquired Francis.

"Certainly," replied the porter.  "Mademoiselle is the daughter of
the house; and strange it is to see how she is made to work.  For all
his riches, it is she who goes to market; and every day in the week
you may see her going by with a basket on her arm."

"And the collections?" asked the other.

"Sir," said the man, "they are immensely valuable.  More I can not
tell you.  Since M. de Vandeleur's arrival no one in the quarter has
so much as passed the door."

"Suppose not," returned Francis, "you must surely have some notion
what these famous galleries contain.  Is it pictures, silks, statues,
jewels, or what?"

"My faith, sir," said the fellow with a shrug, "it might be carrots,
and still I could not tell you.  How should I know?  The house is
kept like a garrison, as you perceive."

And then as Francis was returning disappointed to his room, the
porter called him back.

"I have just remembered, sir," said he.  "M. de Vandeleur has been in
all parts of the world, and I once heard the old woman declare that
he had brought many diamonds back with him.  If that be the truth,
there must be a fine show behind those shutters."

By an early hour on Sunday Francis was in his place at the theatre.
The seat which had been taken for him was only two or three numbers
from the left-hand side, and directly opposite one of the lower
boxes.  As the seat had been specially chosen there was doubtless
something to be learned from its position; and he judged by an
instinct that the box upon his right was, in some way or other, to be
connected with the drama in which he ignorantly played a part.
Indeed it was so situated that its occupants could safely observe him
from beginning to end of the piece, if they were so minded; while,
profiting by the depth, they could screen themselves sufficiently
well from any counter-examination on his side.  He promised himself
not to leave it for a moment out of sight; and while he scanned the
rest of the theatre, or made a show of attending to the business of
the stage, he always kept a corner of an eye upon the empty box.

The second act had been some time in progress, and was even drawing
toward a close, when the door opened and two persons entered and
ensconced themselves in the darkest of the shade.  Francis could
hardly control his emotion.  It was Mr. Vandeleur and his daughter.
The blood came and went in his arteries and veins with stunning
activity; his ears sang; his head turned.  He dared not look lest he
should awake suspicion; his play-bill, which he kept reading from end
to end and over and over again, turned from white to red before his
eyes; and when he cast a glance upon the stage, it seemed
incalculably far away, and he found the voices and gestures of the
actors to the last degree impertinent and absurd.

From time to time he risked a momentary look in the direction which
principally interested him; and once at least he felt certain that
his eyes encountered those of the young girl.  A shock passed over
his body, and he saw all the colors of the rainbow.  What would he
not have given to overhear what passed between the Vandeleurs?  What
would he not have given for the courage to take up his opera-glass
and steadily inspect their attitude and expression?  There, for aught
he knew, his whole life was being decided--and he not able to
interfere, not able even to follow the debate, but condemned to sit
and suffer where he was, in impotent anxiety.

At last the act came to an end.  The curtain fell, and the people
around him began to leave their places for the interval.  It was only
natural that he should follow their example; and if he did so, it was
not only natural but necessary that he should pass immediately in
front of the box in question.  Summoning all his courage, but keeping
his eyes lowered, Francis drew near the spot.  His progress was slow,
for the old gentleman before him moved with incredible deliberation,
wheezing as he went.  What was he to do?  Should he address the
Vandeleurs by name as he went by?  Should he take the flower from his
buttonhole and throw it into the box?  Should he raise his face and
direct one long and affectionate look upon the lady who was either
his sister or his betrothed?  As he found himself thus struggling
among so many alternatives, he had a vision of his old equable
existence in the bank, and was assailed by a thought of regret for
the past.

By this time he had arrived directly opposite the box; and although
he was still undetermined what to do or whether to do anything, he
turned his head and lifted his eyes.  No sooner had he done so than
he uttered a cry of disappointment and remained rooted to the spot.
The box was empty.  During his slow advance Mr. Vandeleur and his
daughter had quietly slipped away.

A polite person in his rear reminded him that he was stopping the
path; and he moved on again with mechanical footsteps, and suffered
the crowd to carry him unresisting out of the theatre.  Once in the
street, the pressure ceasing, he came to a halt, and the cool night
air speedily restored him to the possession of his faculties.  He was
surprised to find that his head ached violently, and that he
remembered not one word of the two acts which he had witnessed.  As
the excitement wore away, it was succeeded by an over-weening
appetite for sleep, and he hailed a cab and drove to his lodging in a
state of extreme exhaustion and some disgust of life.

Next morning he lay in wait for Miss Vandeleur on her road to market,
and by eight o'clock beheld her stepping down a lane.  She was
simply, and even poorly, attired; but in the carriage of her head and
body there was something flexible and noble that would have lent
distinction to the meanest toilet.  Even her basket, so aptly did she
carry it, became her like an ornament.  It seemed to Francis, as he
slipped into a doorway, that the sunshine followed and the shadows
fled before her as she walked; and he was conscious, for the first
time, of a bird singing in a cage above the lane.

He suffered her to pass the doorway, and then, coming forth once
more, addressed her by name from behind.

"Miss Vandeleur," said he.

She turned, and, when she saw who he was, became deadly pale.

"Pardon me," he continued; "Heaven knows I had no will to startle
you; and, indeed, there should be nothing startling in the presence
of one who wishes you so well as I do.  And, believe me, I am acting
rather from necessity than choice.  We have many things in common,
and I am sadly in the dark.  There is much that I should be doing,
and my hands are tied.  I do not know even what to feel, nor who are
my friends and enemies."

She found her voice with an effort.

"I do not know who you are," she said.

"Ah, yes!  Miss Vandeleur, you do," returned Francis; "better than I
do myself.  Indeed it is on that, above all, that I seek light.  Tell
me what you know," he pleaded.  "Tell me who I am, who you are, and
how our destinies are intermixed.  Give me a little help with my
life, Miss Vandeleur--only a word or two to guide me, only the name
of my father, if you will--and I shall be grateful and content."

"I will not attempt to deceive you," she replied.  "I know who you
are, but I am not at liberty to say."

"Tell me, at least, that you have forgiven my presumption, and I
shall wait with all the patience I have," he said.  "If I am not to
know, I must do without.  It is cruel, but I can bear more upon a
push.  Only do not add to my troubles the thought that I have made an
enemy of you."

"You did only what was natural," she said, "and I have nothing to
forgive you.  Farewell."

"Is it to be _farewell_?" he asked.

"Nay, that I do not know myself," she answered.  "Farewell for the
present, if you like."

And with these words she was gone.

Francis returned to his lodging in a state of considerable commotion
of mind.  He made the most trifling progress with his Euclid for that
forenoon, and was more often at the window than at his improvised
writing-table.  But beyond seeing the return of Miss Vandeleur, and
the meeting between her and her father, who was smoking a
Trichinopoli cigar in the veranda, there was nothing notable in the
neighborhood of the house with the green blinds before the time of
the midday meal.  The young man hastily allayed his appetite in a
neighboring restaurant, and returned with the speed of unallayed
curiosity to the house in the Rue Lepic.  A mounted servant was
leading a saddle-horse to and fro before the garden wall; and the
porter of Francis's lodging was smoking a pipe against the door-post,
absorbed in contemplation of the livery and the steeds.

"Look!" he cried to the young man, "what fine cattle! what an elegant
costume!  They belong to the brother of M. de Vandeleur, who is now
within upon a visit.  He is a great man, a general, in your country;
and you doubtless know him well by reputation."

"I confess," returned Francis, "that I have never heard of General
Vandeleur before.  We have many officers of that grade, and my
pursuits have been exclusively civil."

"It is he," replied the porter, "who lost the great diamond of the
Indies.  Of that at least you must have read often in the papers."

As soon as Francis could disengage himself from the porter he ran
upstairs and hurried to the window.  Immediately below the clear
space in the chestnut leaves, the two gentlemen were seated in
conversation over a cigar.  The General, a red, military-looking man,
offered some traces of a family resemblance to his brother; he had
something of the same features, something, although very little, of
the same free and powerful carriage; but he was older, smaller, and
more common in air; his likeness was that of a caricature, and he
seemed altogether a poor and debile being by the side of the Dictator.

They spoke in tones so low, leaning over the table with every
appearance of interest, that Francis could catch no more than a word
or two on an occasion.  For as little as he heard, he was convinced
that the conversation turned upon himself and his own career; several
times the name of Scrymgeour reached his ear, for it was easy to
distinguish, and still more frequently he fancied he could
distinguish the name Francis.

At length the General, as if in a hot anger, broke forth into several
violent exclamations.

"Francis Vandeleur!" he cried, accentuating the last word.  "Francis
Vandeleur, I tell you."

The Dictator made a movement of his whole body, half affirmative,
half contemptuous, but his answer was inaudible to the young man.

Was he the Francis Vandeleur in question? he wondered.  Were they
discussing the name under which he was to be married?  Or was the
whole affair a dream and a delusion of his own conceit and
self-absorption?

After another interval of inaudible talk, dissension seemed again to
arise between the couple underneath the chestnut, and again the
General raised his voice angrily so as to be audible to Francis.

"My wife?" he cried.  "I have done with my wife for good.  I will not
hear her name.  I am sick of her very name."

And he swore aloud and beat the table with his fist.

The Dictator appeared, by his gestures, to pacify him after a
paternal fashion; and a little after he conducted him to the garden
gate.  The pair shook hands affectionately enough; but as soon as the
door had closed behind his visitor, John Vandeleur fell into a fit of
laughter which sounded unkindly and even devilish in the ears of
Francis Scrymgeour.

So another day had passed, and little more learned.  But the young
man remembered that the morrow was Tuesday, and promised himself some
curious discoveries; all might be well, or all might be ill; he was
sure, at least, to glean some curious information, and, perhaps, by
good luck, get at the heart of the mystery which surrounded his
father and his family.

As the hour of the dinner drew near many preparations were made in
the garden of the house with the green blinds.  That table which was
partly visible to Francis through the chestnut leaves was destined to
serve as a sideboard, and carried relays of plates and the materials
for salad; the other, which was almost entirely concealed, had been
set apart for the diners, and Francis could catch glimpses of white
cloth and silver plate.

Mr. Rolles arrived, punctual to the minute; he looked like a man upon
his guard, and spoke low and sparingly.  The Dictator, on the other
hand, appeared to enjoy an unusual flow of spirits; his laugh, which
was youthful and pleasant to hear, sounded frequently from the
garden; by the modulation and the changes of his voice it was obvious
that he told many droll stories and imitated the accents of a variety
of different nations; and before he and the young clergyman had
finished their vermuth all feeling of distrust was at an end, and
they were talking together like a pair of school companions.

At length Miss Vandeleur made her appearance, carrying the
soup-tureen.  Mr. Rolles ran to offer her assistance which she
laughingly refused; and there was an interchange of pleasantries
among the trio which seemed to have reference to this primitive
manner of waiting by one of the company.

"One is more at one's ease," Mr. Vandeleur was heard to declare.

Next moment they were all three in their places, and Francis could
see as little as he could hear of what passed.  But the dinner seemed
to go merrily; there was a perpetual babble of voices and sound of
knives and forks below the chestnut; and Francis, who had no more
than a roll to gnaw, was affected with envy by the comfort and
deliberation of the meal.  The party lingered over one dish after
another, and then over a delicate dessert, with a bottle of old wine
carefully uncorked by the hand of the Dictator himself.  As it began
to grow dark a lamp was set upon the table and a couple of candles on
the sideboard; for the night was perfectly pure, starry, and
windless.  Light overflowed besides from the door and window in the
veranda, so that the garden was fairly illuminated and the leaves
twinkled in the darkness.

For perhaps the tenth time Miss Vandeleur entered the house; and on
this occasion she returned with the coffee-tray, which she placed
upon the sideboard.  At the same moment her father rose from his seat.

"The coffee is my province," Francis heard him say.

And next moment he saw his supposed father standing by the sideboard
in the light of the candles.

Talking over his shoulder all the while, Mr. Vandeleur poured out two
cups of the brown stimulant, and then, by a rapid act of
prestidigitation, emptied the contents of a tiny phial into the
smaller of the two.  The thing was so swiftly done that even Francis,
who looked straight into his face, had hardly time to perceive the
movement before it was completed.  And next instant, and still
laughing, Mr. Vandeleur had turned again toward the table with a cup
in either hand.

"Ere we have done with this," said he, "we may expect our famous
Hebrew."

It would be impossible to depict the confusion and distress of
Francis Scrymgeour.  He saw foul play going forward before his eyes,
and he felt bound to interfere, but knew not how.  It might be a mere
pleasantry, and then how should he look if he were to offer an
unnecessary warning?  Or again, if it were serious, the criminal
might be his own father, and then how should he not lament if he were
to bring ruin on the author of his days?  For the first time he
became conscious of his own position as a spy.  To wait inactive at
such a juncture and with such a conflict of sentiments in his bosom
was to suffer the most acute torture; he clung to the bars of the
shutters, his heart beat fast and with irregularity, and he felt a
strong sweat break forth upon his body.

Several minutes passed.

He seemed to perceive the conversation die away and grow less and
less in vivacity and volume; but still no sign of any alarming or
even notable event.

Suddenly the ring of a glass breaking was followed by a faint and
dull sound, as of a person who should have fallen forward with his
head upon the table.  At the same moment a piercing scream rose from
the garden.

"What have you done?" cried Miss Vandeleur.  "He is dead!"

The Dictator replied in a violent whisper, so strong and sibilant
that every word was audible to the watcher at the window.

"Silence!" said Mr. Vandeleur; "the man is as well as I am.  Take him
by the heels while I carry him by the shoulders."

Francis heard Miss Vandeleur break forth into a passion of tears.

"Do you hear what I say?" resumed the Dictator, in the same tones.
"Or do you wish to quarrel with me?  I give you your choice, Miss
Vandeleur."

There was another pause, and the Dictator spoke again.

"Take that man by the heels," he said.  "I must have him brought into
the house.  If I were a little younger, I could help myself against
the world.  But now that years and dangers are upon me and my hands
are weakened, I must turn to you for aid."

"It is a crime," replied the girl.

"I am your father," said Mr. Vandeleur.

This appeal seemed to produce its effect.  A scuffling noise followed
upon the gravel, a chair was overset, and then Francis saw the father
and daughter stagger across the walk and disappear under the veranda,
bearing the inanimate body of Mr. Rolles embraced about the knees and
shoulders.  The young clergyman was limp and pallid, and his head
rolled upon his shoulders at every step.

Was he alive or dead?  Francis, in spite of the Dictator's
declaration, inclined to the latter view.  A great crime had been
committed; a great calamity had fallen upon the inhabitants of the
house with the green blinds.  To his surprise, Francis found all
horror for the deed swallowed up in sorrow for a girl and an old man
whom he judged to be in the height of peril.  A tide of generous
feeling swept into his heart; he, too, would help his father against
man and mankind, against fate and justice; and casting open the
shutters he closed his eyes and threw himself with outstretched arms
into the foliage of the chestnut.

Branch after branch slipped from his grasp or broke under his weight;
then he caught a stalwart bough under his armpit, and hung suspended
for a second; and then he let himself drop and fell heavily against
the table.  A cry of alarm from the house warned him that his
entrance had not been effected unobserved.  He recovered himself with
a stagger, and in three bounds crossed the intervening space and
stood before the door in the veranda.

In a small apartment, carpeted with matting and surrounded by glazed
cabinets full of rare and costly curios, Mr. Vandeleur was stooping
over the body of Mr. Rolles.  He raised himself as Francis entered,
and there was an instantaneous passage of hands.  It was the business
of a second; as fast as an eye can wink the thing was done; the young
man had not the time to be sure, but it seemed to him as if the
Dictator had taken something from the curate's breast, looked at it
for the least fraction of time as it lay in his hand, and then
suddenly and swiftly passed it to his daughter.

All this was over while Francis had still one foot upon the
threshold, and the other raised in air.  The next instant he was on
his knees to Mr. Vandeleur.

"Father!" he cried.  "Let me too help you.  I will do what you wish
and ask no questions; I will obey you with my life; treat me as a
son, and you will find I have a son's demotion."

A deplorable explosion of oaths was the Dictator's first reply.

"Son and father?" he cried.  "Father and son?  What d----d unnatural
comedy is all this?  How do you come in my garden?  What do you want?
And who, in God's name, are you?"

Francis, with a stunned and shamefaced aspect, got upon his feet
again, and stood in silence.

Then a light seemed to break upon Mr. Vandeleur, and he laughed aloud.

"I see," cried he.  "It is the Scrymgeour.  Very well, Mr.
Scrymgeour.  Let me tell you in a few words how you stand.  You have
entered my private residence by force, or perhaps by fraud, but
certainly with no encouragement from me; and you come at a moment of
some annoyance, a guest having fainted at my table, to besiege me
with your protestations.  You are no son of mine.  You are my
brother's bastard by a fishwife, if you want to know.  I regard you
with an indifference closely bordering on aversion; and from what I
now see of your conduct, I judge your mind to be exactly suitable to
your exterior.  I recommend you these mortifying reflections for your
leisure; and, in the meantime, let me beseech you to rid us of your
presence.  If I were not occupied," added the Dictator, with a
terrifying oath, "I should give you the unholiest drubbing ere you
went!"

Francis listened in profound humiliation.  He would have fled had it
been possible; but as he had no means of leaving the residence into
which he had so unfortunately penetrated, he could do no more than
stand foolishly where he was.

It was Miss Vandeleur who broke the silence.

"Father," she said, "you speak in anger.  Mr. Scrymgeour may have
been mistaken, but he meant well and kindly."

"Thank you for speaking," returned the Dictator.  "You remind me of
some other observations which I hold it a point of honor to make to
Mr. Scrymgeour.  My brother," he continued, addressing the young man,
"has been foolish enough to give you an allowance; he was foolish
enough and presumptuous enough to propose a match between you and
this young lady.  You were exhibited to her two nights ago; and I
rejoice to tell you that she rejected the idea with disgust.  Let me
add that I have considerable influence with your father; and it shall
not be my fault if you are not beggared of your allowance and sent
back to your scrivening ere the week be out."

The tones of the old man's voice were, if possible, more wounding
than his language; Francis felt himself exposed to the most cruel,
blighting, and unbearable contempt; his head turned, and he covered
his face with his hands, uttering at the same time a tearless sob of
agony.  But Miss Vandeleur once again interfered in his behalf.

"Mr. Scrymgeour," she said, speaking in clear and even tones, "you
must not be concerned at my father's harsh expressions.  I felt no
disgust for you; on the contrary, I asked an opportunity to make your
better acquaintance.  As for what has passed to-night, believe me, it
has filled my mind with both pity and esteem."

Just then Mr. Rolles made a convulsive movement with his arm, which
convinced Francis that he was only drugged, and was beginning to
throw off the influence of the opiate.  Mr. Vandeleur stooped over
him and examined his face for an instant.

"Come, come!" cried he, raising his head.  "Let there be an end of
this.  And since you are so pleased with his conduct, Miss Vandeleur,
take a candle and show the bastard out."

The young lady hastened to obey.

"Thank you," said Francis, as soon as he was alone with her in the
garden.  "I thank you from my soul.  This has been the bitterest
evening of my life, but it will have always one pleasant
recollection."

"I spoke as I felt," she replied, "and in justice to you.  It made my
heart sorry that you should be so unkindly used."

By this time they had reached the garden gate; and Miss Vandeleur,
having set the candle on the ground, was already unfastening the
bolts.

"One word more," said Francis.  "This is not for the last time--I
shall see you again, shall I not?"

"Alas!" she answered.  "You have heard my father.  What can I do but
obey?"

"Tell me at least that it is not with your consent," returned
Francis; "tell me that you have no wish to see the last of me."

"Indeed," replied she, "I have none.  You seem to me both brave and
honest."

"Then," said Francis, "give me a keepsake."

She paused for a moment, with her hand upon the key; for the various
bars and bolts were all undone, and there was nothing left but to
open the lock.

"If I agree," she said, "will you promise to do as I tell you from
point to point?"

"Can you ask?" replied Francis.  "I would do so willingly on your
bare word."

She turned the key and threw open the door.

"Be it so," said she.  "You do not know what you ask, but be it so.
Whatever you hear," she continued, "whatever happens, do not return
to this house; hurry fast until you reach the lighted and populous
quarters of the city; even there be upon your guard.  You are in a
greater danger than you fancy.  Promise me you will not so much as
look at my keepsake until you are in a place of safety."

"I promise," replied Francis.

She put something loosely wrapped in a handkerchief into the young
man's hand; and at the same time, with more strength than he could
have anticipated, she pushed him into the street.

"Now, run!" she cried.

He heard the door close behind him, and the noise of the bolts being
replaced.

"My faith," said he, "since I have promised!"

And he took to his heels down the lane that leads into the Rue
Ravignan.

He was not fifty paces from the house with the green blinds when the
most diabolical outcry suddenly arose out of the stillness of the
night.  Mechanically he stood still; another passenger followed his
example; in the neighboring floors he saw people crowding to the
windows; a conflagration could not have produced more disturbance in
this empty quarter.  And yet it seemed to be all the work of a single
man, roaring between grief and rage, like a lioness robbed of her
whelps; and Francis was surprised and alarmed to hear his own name
shouted with English imprecations to the wind.

His first movement was to return to the house; his second, as he
remembered Miss Vandeleur's advice, to continue his flight with
greater expedition than before; and he was in the act of turning to
put his thought in action, when the Dictator, bare-headed, bawling
aloud, his white hair blowing about his head, shot past him like a
ball out of the cannon's mouth, and went careering down the street.

"That was a close shave," thought Francis to himself.  "What he wants
with me, and why he should be so disturbed, I can not think; but he
is plainly not good company for the moment, and I can not do better
than follow Miss Vandeleur's advice."

So saying, he turned to retrace his steps, thinking to double and
descend by the Rue Lepic itself while his pursuer should continue to
follow after him on the other line of street.  The plan was
ill-devised: as a matter of fact, he should have taken his seat in
the nearest caf√©, and waited there until the first heat of the
pursuit was over.  But besides that Francis had no experience and
little natural aptitude for the small war of private life, he was so
unconscious of any evil on his part, that he saw nothing to fear
beyond a disagreeable interview.  And to disagreeable interviews he
felt he had already served his apprenticeship that evening; nor could
he suppose that Miss Vandeleur had left anything unsaid.  Indeed, the
young man was sore both in body and mind--the one was all bruised,
the other was full of smarting arrows; and he owned to himself that
Mr. Vandeleur was master of a very deadly tongue.

The thought of his bruises reminded him that he had not only come
without a hat, but that his clothes had considerably suffered in his
descent through the chestnut.  At the first magazine he purchased a
cheap wideawake, and had the disorder of his toilet summarily
repaired.  The keepsake, still rolled in the handkerchief, he thrust
in the meanwhile into his trousers pocket.

Not many steps beyond the shop he was conscious of a sudden shock, a
hand upon his throat, an infuriated face close to his own, and an
open mouth bawling curses in his ear.  The Dictator, having found no
trace of his quarry, was returning by the other way.  Francis was a
stalwart young fellow, but he was no match for his adversary whether
in strength or skill; and after a few ineffectual struggles he
resigned himself entirely to his captor.

"What do you want with me?" said he.

"We will talk of that at home," returned the Dictator, grimly.

And he continued to march the young man up hill in the direction of
the house with the green blinds.

But Francis, although he no longer struggled, was only waiting an
opportunity to make a bold push for freedom.  With a sudden jerk he
left the collar of his coat in the hands of Mr. Vandeleur, and once
more made off at his best speed in the direction of the Boulevards.

The tables were now turned.  If the Dictator was the stronger,
Francis, in the top of his youth, was the more fleet of foot, and he
had soon effected his escape among the crowds.  Relieved for a
moment, but with a growing sentiment of alarm and wonder in his mind,
he walked briskly until he debouched upon the Place de l'Opera, lit
up like day with electric lamps.

"This, at least," thought he, "should satisfy Miss Vandeleur."

And turning to his right along the Boulevards, he entered the Caf√©
Americain and ordered some beer.  It was both late and early for the
majority of the frequenters of the establishment.  Only two or three
persons, all men, were dotted here and there at separate tables in
the hall; and Francis was too much occupied by his own thoughts to
observe their presence.

He drew the handkerchief from his pocket.  The object wrapped in it
proved to be a morocco case, clasped and ornamented in gilt, which
opened by means of a spring, and disclosed to the horrified young man
a diamond of monstrous bigness and extraordinary brilliancy.  The
circumstance was so inexplicable, the value of the stone was plainly
so enormous, that Francis sat staring into the open casket without
movement, without conscious thought, like a man stricken suddenly
with idiocy.

A hand was laid upon his shoulder, lightly but firmly, and a quiet
voice, which yet had in it the ring of command, uttered these words
in his ear:

"Close the casket, and compose your face."

Looking up, he beheld a man, still young, of an urbane and tranquil
presence, and dressed with rich simplicity.  This personage had risen
from a neighboring table, and, bringing his glass with him, had taken
a seat beside Francis.

"Close the casket," repeated the stranger, "and put it quietly back
into your pocket, where I feel persuaded it should never have been.
Try, if you please, to throw off your bewildered air, and act as
thought I were one of your acquaintances whom you had met by chance.
So!  Touch glasses with me.  That is better.  I fear, sir, you must
be an amateur."

And the stranger pronounced these last words with a smile of peculiar
meaning, leaned back in his seat, and enjoyed a deep inhalation of
tobacco.

"For God's sake," said Francis, "tell me who you are and what this
means?  Why I should obey your most unusual suggestions I am sure I
know not; but the truth is, I have fallen this evening into so many
perplexing adventures, and all I meet conduct themselves so
strangely, that I think I must either have gone mad or wandered into
another planet Your face inspires me with confidence; you seem wise,
good, and experienced; tell me, for Heaven's sake, why you accost me
in so odd a fashion?"

"All in due time," replied the stranger.  "But I have the first hand,
and you must begin by telling me how the Rajah's Diamond is in your
possession."

"The Rajah's Diamond!" echoed Francis.

"I would not speak so loud, if I were you," returned the other.  "But
most certainly you have the Rajah's Diamond in your pocket.  I have
seen and handled it a score of times in Sir Thomas Vandeleur's
collection."

"Sir Thomas Vandeleur!  The General!  My father!" cried Francis.

"Your father?" repeated the stranger.  "I was not aware the General
had any family."

"I am illegitimate, sir," replied Francis, with a flush.

The other bowed with gravity.  It was a respectful bow, as of a man
silently apologizing to his equal; and Francis felt relieved and
comforted, he scarce knew why.  The society of this person did him
good; he seemed to touch firm ground; a strong feeling of respect
grew up in his bosom, and mechanically he removed his wideawake as
though in the presence of a superior.

"I perceive," said the stranger, "that your adventures have not all
been peaceful.  Your collar is torn, your face is scratched, you have
a cut upon your temple; you will, perhaps, pardon my curiosity when I
ask you to explain how you came by these injuries, and how you happen
to have stolen property to an enormous value in your pocket."

"I must differ from you!" returned Francis, hotly.  "I possess no
stolen property.  And if you refer to the diamond, it was given to me
not an hour ago by Miss Vandeleur in the Rue Lepic."

"By Miss Vandeleur of the Rue Lepic!" repeated the other.  "You
interest me more than you suppose.  Pray continue."

"Heavens!" cried Francis.

His memory had made a sudden bound.  He had seen Mr. Vandeleur take
an article from the breast of his drugged visitor, and that article,
he was now persuaded, was a morocco case.

"You have a light?" inquired the stranger.

"Listen," replied Francis.  "I know not who you are, but I believe
you to be worthy of confidence and helpful; I find myself in strange
waters; I must have counsel and support, and since you invite me I
shall tell you all."

And he briefly recounted his experiences since the day when he was
summoned from the bank by his lawyer.

"Yours is indeed a remarkable history," said the stranger, after the
young man had made an end of his narrative; "and your position is
full of difficulty and peril.  Many would counsel you to seek out
your father, and give the diamond to him; but I have other views.
Waiter!" he cried.

The waiter drew near.

"Will you ask the manager to speak with me a moment?" said he; and
Francis observed once more, both in his tone and manner, the evidence
of a habit of command.

The waiter withdrew, and returned in a moment with the manager, who
bowed with obsequious respect.

"What," said he, "can I do to serve you?"

"Have the goodness," replied the stranger, indicating Francis, "to
tell this gentleman my name."

"You have the honor, sir," said the functionary, addressing young
Scrymgeour, "to occupy the same table with His Highness Prince
Florizel of Bohemia."

Francis rose with precipitation, and made a grateful reverence to the
Prince, who bade him resume his seat.

"I thank you," said Florizel, once more addressing the functionary;
"I am sorry to have deranged you for so small a matter."

And he dismissed him with a movement of his hand.

"And now," added the Prince, turning to Francis, "give me the
diamond."

Without a word the casket was handed over.

"You have done right," said Florizel; "your sentiments have properly
inspired you, and you will live to be grateful for the misfortunes of
to-night.  A man, Mr. Scrymgeour, may fall into a thousand
perplexities, but if his heart be upright and his intelligence
unclouded, he will issue from them all without dishonor.  Let your
mind be at rest; your affairs are in my hand; and with the aid of
Heaven I am strong enough to bring them to a good end.  Follow me, if
you please, to my carriage."

So saying, the Prince arose and, having left a piece of gold for the
waiter, conducted the young man from the caf√© and along the Boulevard
to where an unpretentious brougham and a couple of servants out of
livery awaited his arrival.

"This carriage," said he, "is at your disposal; collect your baggage
as rapidly as you can make it convenient, and my servants will
conduct you to a villa in the neighborhood of Paris where you can
wait in some degree of comfort until I have had time to arrange your
situation.  You will find there a pleasant garden, a library of good
authors, a cook, a cellar, and some good cigars, which I recommend to
your attention.  Jerome," he added, turning to one of the servants,
"you have heard what I say; I leave Mr. Scrymgeour in your charge;
you will, I know, be careful of my friend."

Francis uttered some broken phrases of gratitude.

"It will be time enough to thank me," said the Prince, "when you are
acknowledged by your father and married to Miss Vandeleur."

And with that the Prince turned away and strolled leisurely in the
direction of Montmarte.  He hailed the first passing cab, gave an
address, and a quarter of an hour afterward, having discharged the
driver some distance lower, he was knocking at Mr. Vandeleur's
garden-gate.

It was opened with singular precautions by the Dictator in person.

"Who are you?" he demanded.

"You must pardon me this late visit, Mr. Vandeleur," replied the
Prince.

"Your Highness is always welcome," returned Mr. Vandeleur, stepping
back.

The Prince profited by the open space, and without waiting for his
host walked right into the house and opened the door of the salon.
Two people were seated there; one was Miss Vandeleur, who bore the
marks of weeping about her eyes, and was still shaken from time to
time by a sob; in the other the Prince recognized the young man who
had consulted him on literary matters about a month before, in a club
smoking-room.

"Good-evening, Miss Vandeleur," said Florizel; "you look fatigued.
Mr. Rolles, I believe?  I hope you have profited by the study of
Gaboriau, Mr. Rolles."

But the young clergyman's temper was too much embittered for speech;
and he contented himself with bowing stiffly, and continued to gnaw
his lip.

"To what good wind," said Mr. Vandeleur, following his guest, "am I
to attribute the honor of your Highness's presence?"

"I am come on business," returned the Prince; "on business with you;
as soon as that is settled I shall request Mr. Rolles to accompany me
for a walk.  Mr. Rolles," he added, with severity, "let me remind you
that I have not yet sat down."

The clergyman sprang to his feet with an apology; whereupon the
Prince took an armchair beside the table, handed his hat to Mr.
Vandeleur, his cane to Mr. Rolles, and, leaving them standing and
thus menially employed upon his service, spoke as follows:

"I have come here, as I said, upon business; but, had I come looking
for pleasure, I could not have been more displeased with my reception
nor more dissatisfied with my company.  You, sir," addressing Mr.
Rolles, "you have treated your superior in station with discourtesy;
you, Vandeleur, receive me with a smile, but you know right well that
your hands are not yet cleansed from misconduct.  I do not desire to
be interrupted, sir," he added, imperiously; "I am here to speak, and
not to listen; and I have to ask you to hear me with respect, and to
obey punctiliously.  At the earliest possible date your daughter
shall be married at the Embassy to my friend, Francis Scrymgeour,
your brother's acknowledged son.  You will oblige me by offering not
less than ten thousand pounds dowry.  For yourself, I will indicate
to you in writing a mission of some importance in Siam which I
destine to your care.  And now, sir, you will answer me in two words
whether or not you agree to these conditions."

"Your Highness will pardon me," said Mr. Vandeleur, "and permit me,
with all respect, to submit to him two queries?"

"The permission is granted," replied the Prince.

"Your Highness," resumed the Dictator, "has called Mr. Scrymgeour his
friend.  Believe me, had I known he was thus honored, I should have
treated him with proportional respect."

"You interrogate adroitly," said the Prince; "but it will not serve
your turn.  You have my commands; if I had never seen that gentleman
before to-night, it would not render them less absolute."

"Your Highness interprets my meaning with his usual subtlety,"
returned Vandeleur.  "Once more: I have, unfortunately, put the
police upon the track of Mr. Scrymgeour on a charge of theft; am I to
withdraw or to uphold the accusation?"

"You will please yourself," replied Florizel.  "The question is one
between your conscience and the laws of this land.  Give me my hat;
and you, Mr. Rolles, give me my cane and follow me.  Miss Vandeleur,
I wish you good-evening.  I judge," he added to Vandeleur, "that your
silence means unqualified assent."

"If I can do no better," replied the old man, "I shall submit; but I
warn you openly it shall not be without a struggle."

"You are old," said the Prince; "but years are disgraceful to the
wicked.  Your age is more unwise than the youth of others.  Do not
provoke me, or you may find me harder than you dream.  This is the
first time that I have fallen across your path in anger; take care
that it be the last."

With these words, motioning the clergyman to follow, Florizel left
the apartment and directed his steps toward the garden gate; and the
Dictator, following with a candle, gave them light, and once more
undid the elaborate fastenings with which he sought to protect
himself from intrusion.

"Your daughter is no longer present," said the Prince, turning on the
threshold.  "Let me tell you that I understand your threats; and you
have only to lift your hand to bring upon yourself sudden and
irremediable ruin."

The Dictator made no reply; but as the Prince turned his back upon
him in the lamplight he made a gesture full of menace and insane
fury; and the next moment, slipping round a corner, he was running at
full speed for the nearest cab-stand.


[Here, says my Arabian, the thread of events is finally diverted from
"The House with the Green Blinds."  One more adventure, he adds, and
we have done with "The Rajah's Diamond."  That last link in the chain
is known among the inhabitants of Bagdad by the name of "The
Adventure of Prince Florizel and a Detective."]



THE ADVENTURE OF PRINCE FLORIZEL AND A DETECTIVE

Prince Florizel walked with Mr. Rolles to the door of a small hotel
where the latter resided.  They spoke much together, and the
clergyman was more than once affected to tears by the mingled
severity and tenderness of Florizel's reproaches.

"I have made ruin of my life," he said at last.  "Help me; tell me
what I am to do; I have, alas! neither the virtues of a priest nor
the dexterity of a rogue."

"Now that you are humbled," said the Prince, "I command no longer;
the repentant have to do with God and not with princes.  But if you
will let me advise you, go to Australia as a colonist, seek menial
labor in the open air, and try to forget that you have ever been a
clergyman, or that you ever set eyes on that accursed stone."

"Accursed, indeed!" replied Mr. Rolles.  "Where is it now?  What
further hurt is it not working for mankind?"

"It will do no more evil," returned the Prince.  "It is here in my
pocket.  And this," he added, kindly, "will show that I place some
faith in your penitence, young as it is."

"Suffer me to touch your hand," pleaded Mr. Rolles.

"No," replied Prince Florizel, "not yet."

The tone in which he uttered these last words was eloquent in the
ears of the young clergyman; and for some minutes after the Prince
had turned away he stood on the threshold following with his eyes the
retreating figure and invoking the blessing of Heaven upon a man so
excellent in counsel.

For several hours the Prince walked alone in unfrequented streets.
His mind was full of concern; what to do with the diamond, whether to
return it to its owner, whom he judged unworthy of this rare
possession, or to take some sweeping and courageous measure and put
it out of the reach of all mankind at once and forever, was a problem
too grave to be decided in a moment.  The manner in which it had come
into his hands appeared manifestly providential; and as he took out
the jewel and looked at it under the street lamps, its size and
surprising brilliancy inclined him more and more to think of it as of
an unmixed and dangerous evil for the world.

"God help me!" he thought; "if I look at it much oftener I shall
begin to grow covetous myself."

At last, though still uncertain in his mind, he turned his steps
toward the small but elegant mansion on the riverside which had
belonged for centuries to his royal family.  The arms of Bohemia are
deeply graved over the door and upon the tall chimneys; passengers
have a look into a green court set with the most costly flowers, and
a stork, the only one in Paris, perches on the gable all day long and
keeps a crowd before the house.  Grave servants are seen passing to
and fro within; and from time to time the great gate is thrown open
and a carriage rolls below the arch.  For many reasons this residence
was especially dear to the heart of Prince Florizel; he never drew
near to it without enjoying that sentiment of home-coming so rare in
the lives of the great; and on the present evening he beheld its tall
roof and mildly illuminated windows with unfeigned relief and
satisfaction.

As he was approaching the postern-door by which he always entered
when alone, a man stepped forth from the shadow and presented himself
with an obeisance in the Prince's path.

"I have the honor of addressing Prince Florizel of Bohemia?" said he.

"Such is my title," replied the Prince.  "What do you want with me?"

"I am," said the man, "a detective, and I have to present your
Highness with this billet from the Prefect of Police."

The Prince took the letter and glanced it through by the light of the
street lamp.  It was highly apologetic, but requested him to follow
the bearer to the Prefecture without delay.

"In short," said Florizel, "I am arrested."

"Your Highness," replied the officer, "nothing, I am certain, could
be further from the intention of the Prefect.  You will observe that
he has not granted a warrant.  It is mere formality, or call it, if
you prefer, an obligation that your Highness lays on the authorities."

"At the same time," asked the Prince, "if I were to refuse to follow
you?"

"I will not conceal from your Highness that a considerable discretion
has been granted me," replied the detective with a bow.

"Upon my word," cried Florizel, "your effrontery astounds me!
Yourself, as an agent, I must pardon; but your superiors shall dearly
smart for their misconduct.  What, have you any idea, is the cause of
this impolitic and unconstitutional act?  You will observe that I
have as yet neither refused nor consented, and much may depend on
your prompt and ingenuous answer.  Let me remind you, officer, that
this is an affair of some gravity."

"Your Highness," said the detective humbly, "General Vandeleur and
his brother have had the incredible presumption to accuse you of
theft.  The famous diamond, they declare, is in your hands.  A word
from you in denial will most amply satisfy the Prefect; nay, I go
further: if your Highness would so far honor a subaltern as to
declare his ignorance of the matter even to myself, I should ask
permission to retire upon the spot."

Florizel, up to the last moment, had regarded his adventure in the
light of a trifle, only serious upon international considerations.
At the name of Vandeleur the horrible truth broke upon him in a
moment; he was not only arrested, but he was guilty.  This was not
only an annoying incident--it was a peril to his honor.  What was he
to say?  What was he to do?  The Rajah's Diamond was indeed an
accursed stone; and it seemed as if he were to be the last victim to
its influence.

One thing was certain.  He could not give the required assurance to
the detective.  He must gain time.

His hesitation had not lasted a second.

"Be it so," said he, "let us walk together to the Prefecture."

The man once more bowed, and proceeded to follow Florizel at a
respectful distance in the rear.

"Approach," said the Prince.  "I am in a humor to talk, and, if I
mistake not, now I look at you again, this is not the first time that
we have met."

"I count it an honor," replied the officer, "that your Highness
should recollect my face.  It is eight years since I had the pleasure
of an interview."

"To remember faces," returned Florizel, "is as much a part of my
profession as it is of yours.  Indeed, rightly looked upon, a Prince
and a detective serve in the same corps.  We are both combatants
against crime; only mine is the more lucrative and yours the more
dangerous rank, and there is a sense in which both may be made
equally honorable to a good man.  I had rather, strange as you may
think it, be a detective of character and parts than a weak and
ignoble sovereign."

The officer was overwhelmed.

"Your Highness returns good for evil," said he.  "To an act of
presumption he replies by the most amiable condescension."

"How do you know," replied Florizel, "that I am not seeking to
corrupt you?"

"Heaven preserve me from the temptation!" cried the detective.

"I applaud your answer," returned the Prince.  "It is that of a wise
and honest man.  The world is a great place and stocked with wealth
and beauty, and there is no limit to the rewards that may be offered.
Such a one who would refuse a million of money may sell his honor for
an empire or the love of a woman; and I myself, who speak to you,
have seen occasions so tempting, provocations so irresistible to the
strength of human virtue, that I have been glad to tread in your
steps and recommend myself to the grace of God.  It is thus, thanks
to that modest and becoming habit alone," he added, "that you and I
can walk this town together with untarnished hearts."

"I had always heard that you were brave," replied the officer, "but I
was not aware that you were wise and pious.  You speak the truth, and
you speak it with an accent that moves me to the heart.  This world
is indeed a place of trial."

"We are now," said Florizel, "in the middle of the bridge.  Lean your
elbows on the parapet and look over.  As the water rushing below, so
the passions and complications of life carry away the honesty of weak
men.  Let me tell you a story."

"I receive your Highness's commands," replied the man.

And, imitating the Prince, he leaned against the parapet, and
disposed himself to listen.  The city was already sunk in slumber;
had it not been for the infinity of lights and the outline of
buildings on the starry sky, they might have been alone beside some
country river.

"An officer," began Prince Florizel, "a man of courage and conduct,
who had already risen by merit to an eminent rank, and won not only
admiration but respect, visited, in an unfortunate hour for his peace
of mind, the collections of an Indian prince.  Here he beheld a
diamond so extraordinary for size and beauty that from that instant
he had only one desire in life: honor, reputation, friendship, the
love of country, he was ready to sacrifice all for this lump of
sparkling crystal.  For three years he served this semi-barbarian
potentate as Jacob served Laban; he falsified frontiers, he connived
at murders, he unjustly condemned and executed a brother-officer who
had the misfortune to displease the Rajah by some honest freedoms;
lastly, at a time of great danger to his native land, he betrayed a
body of his fellow-soldiers, and suffered them to be defeated and
massacred by thousands.  In the end, he had amassed a magnificent
fortune, and brought home with him the coveted diamond.

"Years passed," continued the Prince, "and at length the diamond is
accidentally lost.  It falls into the hands of a simple and laborious
youth, a student, a minister of God, just entering on a career of
usefulness and even distinction.  Upon him also the spell is cast; he
deserts everything, his holy calling, his studies, and flees with the
gem into a foreign country.  The officer has a brother, an astute,
daring, unscrupulous man, who learns the clergyman's secret.  What
does he do?  Tell his brother, inform the police?  No; upon this man
also the Satanic charm has fallen; he must have the stone for
himself.  At the risk of murder, he drugs the young priest and seizes
the prey.  And now, by an accident which is not important to my
moral, the jewel passes out of his custody into that of another, who,
terrified at what he sees, gives it into the keeping of a man in high
station and above reproach.

"The officer's name is Thomas Vandeleur," continued Florizel.  "The
stone is called the Rajah's Diamond.  And"--suddenly opening his
hand--"you behold it here before your eyes."  The officer started
back with a cry.

"We have spoken of corruption," said the Prince.  "To me this nugget
of bright crystal is as loathsome as though it were crawling with the
worms of death; it is as shocking as though it were compacted out of
innocent blood.  I see it here in my hand, and I know it is shining
with hell-fire.  I have told you but a hundredth part of its story;
what passed in former ages, to what crimes and treacheries it incited
men of yore, the imagination trembles to conceive; for years and
years it has faithfully served the powers of hell; enough, I say, of
blood, enough of disgrace, enough of broken lives and friendships;
all things come to an end, the evil like the good; pestilence as well
as beautiful music; and as for this diamond, God forgive me if I do
wrong, but its empire ends to-night."

The Prince made a sudden movement with his hand, and the jewel,
describing an arc of light, dived with a splash into the flowing
river.

"Amen," said Florizel, with gravity.  "I have slain a cockatrice!"

"God pardon me!" cried the detective.  "What have you done?  I am a
ruined man."

"I think," returned the Prince with a smile, "that many well to do
people in this city might envy you your ruin."

"Alas! your Highness!" said the officer, "and you corrupt me after
all?"

"It seems there was no help for it," replied Florizel.  "And now let
us go forward to the Prefecture."


Not long after, the marriage of Francis Scrymgeour and Miss Vandeleur
was celebrated in great privacy; and the Prince acted on that
occasion as groomsman.  The two Vandeleurs surmised some rumor of
what had happened to the diamond; and their vast diving operations on
the River Seine are the wonder and amusement of the idle.  It is true
that through some miscalculation they have chosen the wrong branch of
the river.  As for the Prince, that sublime person, having now served
his turn, may go, along with the "Arabian Author," topsy-turvy into
space.  But if the reader insists on more specific information, I am
happy to say that a recent revolution hurled him from the throne of
Bohemia, in consequence of his continued absence and edifying neglect
of public business; and that his Highness now keeps a cigar store in
Rupert Street, much frequented by other foreign refugees.  I go there
from time to time to smoke and have a chat, and find him as great a
creature as in the days of his prosperity; he has an Olympian air
behind the counter; and although a sedentary life is beginning to
tell upon his waistcoat, he is probably, take him for all in all, the
handsomest tobacconist in London.




THE MYSTERY OF THE STEEL DISK

BY BROUGHTON BRANDENBURG

_Broughton Brandenburg, a young Ohioan, was educated at Otterbein and
Princeton Universities, became a war correspondent at twenty, serving
in the Spanish-American and Boer wars, and shortly thereafter
attracted attention as a traveler and sociological investigator.  He
studied immigration disguised as an Italian peasant, and sea-faring
life as a common sailor and stevedore.  Then he began to write sea
stories, immigration articles, circus stories, and occasionally
unusually interesting detective stories.  "Lawrence Rand" has been
the central figure in a number of tales notable for business-like
handling of real people._



THE MYSTERY OF THE STEEL DISK

By BROUGHTON BRANDENBURG

The telephone bell in the outer office rang, and opening the switch
at the side of my desk I took up my stand-'phone and answered:

"Hello.  Well?"

"Hello, is this Duncan & Betts?" inquired a man's voice with a slight
foreign accent.

"Yes."

"I want to speak wit' Mister Lawrence Duncan."

"This is Mr. Duncan.  What can I do for you?"

"T'is is Mr. Martin Anderson of 196 Gramercy Park.  Yust now while I
was eating my breakwast in my rooms over my real estate office, I was
called to my telephone by Mr. George Rhodes, who is in t'e Municipal
Bank.  He is a young man who wants to marry my daughter Marie, and he
called me up to tell me t'at when he opened t'e wault a little while
ago he found t'at since he closed it t'e night before a package wit'
more t'an a million dollars in bonds was gone.  He is responsible for
t'e wault and no one else, and he called me up to tell me, and say he
did not take it, to tell Marie t'at, but he wit'drew his request for
her hand.  Now, t'en, Mr. Duncan, I don't care one tam about him, but
my daughter must not be made to come in in t'is case wit' t'e
noos-papers or t'e gossip, so I want you to go over to t'e bank and
see him and help him out in every way, yust so he keep his mout' shut
about Marie, and if t'ey lock him up I want t'at she don't get to see
him or no such foolishness.  I send you my check for five hundred
t'is morning, and I want to know all about what you do, at my house
to-night.  Will you do it?"

"Yes, I will go over at once," I answered.

"T'at is all.  Good-by--"

"Thank you.  Good-by.  I will call this evening."

"Good-by, Mr. Duncan."

My first impression as I hung up the receiver was a thrill at being
thus thrust into the centre of what appeared to be one of the biggest
cases which had transpired in years.  My second was a pleasurable
recognition of the crisp, direct, clear, and ample statement of the
matter which the old real estate man had made.  It had all been done
in two minutes or less.  It is not often that we lawyers encounter
people outside of our own and the newspaper profession who can state
anything so concisely and not lose any value in it.

At this moment, Betts, my partner, and the stenographer came in, so I
hurried over to the Municipal Bank.

Business was just beginning for the day.  I could see at a glance
over the men behind the brass screens that they as a whole did not as
yet know that the bank was a loser by a million.  The cashier's door
was open, and he was just smoothing out his morning mail in the
calmest of manners.  No one looked up as I entered; that showed
normal state of mind among the clerks.

I asked for Mr. George Rhodes, and a tall, broad shouldered,
clean-cut young chap came forward from a desk in the extreme rear of
the place and took my card through the bars.  Even with the slight
view I could get of his face, I perceived he was pale and haggard.
He opened a side door and admitted me to the anteroom of the
directors' chamber.  I told him I had come in his interest, retained
by Mr. Anderson, and stated my client's reason for sending me,
namely, to prevent his daughter's name from being mentioned in the
matter at any or all times, and asked the young man what I could do
for him.

He had been sitting running his thumb-nail precisely along the edge
of my card, and now he looked up and said, in a dull, expressionless
way:

"Really, Mr. Duncan, I have thought the matter over carefully, and
there is nothing to do."

He seemed so numbed and hopeless that I was amused.

"You surprise me, Mr. Rhodes," I said.  "Surely a thing like this can
not in itself shut off any action.  In the first place, give me the
facts.  We will see what can be done."

"The facts are few enough," he answered, simply.  "The bonds were in
a package four inches thick.  They were '90 government fours, clipped
and worth one million two hundred thousand when entered the first of
the month, three weeks ago.  They were marked with a typewritten slip
on the end and lay in the securities compartment of the vault.  Last
night, with the assistant cashier and the receiving teller, as is our
rule here, I checked the cash and books going in.  We together do not
check securities in that compartment except once every month, but I
go over them every night and morning in the way that I was instructed
by the cashier; that is, the packets are piled in alphabetical
classification, and the piling is done so that if a packet were taken
out it would make a hole which I should see at a glance, and by
reference to my list see what it was.  Last night there was nothing
missing, for the pile was perfectly even across the top, and we
closed the vault and set the time-lock.  This morning the time-lock
was still running when I arrived and the safe was absolutely just as
I left it.  When I opened the vault, I went over the securities as
usual, and, observing a slight depression in the rear tier, put my
hand on it.  It gave way enough to show something was missing, and I
checked off the packets and found the '90 governments gone.  I
checked them over three times, and then, when I had got over the
shock, went into the booth outside and telephoned Mr. Anderson just
what I have told you.  Having asked him for his daughter, I felt I
owed that to them and to myself.  The assistant cashier and the
assistant receiving teller were with me when I opened the vault, and
I checked out the books and cash so that they know the safe had not
been touched overnight; now you see it is up to me to account for
those bonds.  Mr. Anderson asked me to wait and see you before I told
the cashier.  The president is not down yet."

I had been watching him covertly as he spoke, and the instant that he
had given me the case I felt the conviction stealing over me that he
had the bonds, or had had them.  The case of a small-salaried trust
company clerk, who put four hundred thousand dollars of his
employer's money into Wall Street in four weeks, rose in my mind.  No
matter, however, whether he had taken them or not, a fifteen or
twenty years' term stared him in the face.  Perhaps he thought that
worth the gain.  I supposed that, of course, he was bonded for one or
two hundred thousand by some one of the fidelity companies, so I did
not trouble to ask him as to that.  I merely remarked, drawing on my
gloves:

"Well, Mr. Rhodes, I would advise you to put back the bonds if you
can do it without detection, or else--slide."

A red flush crept up to his temples.  It was either anger or guilt,
probably both, but he controlled himself and said almost between his
teeth, rising and turning away:

"I wish to bid you good-morning, Mr. Duncan.  You can go back to Mr.
Anderson and tell him Marie will receive a last note from me in an
hour, and now, if you will excuse me, I shall inform the cashier."

Something in his manner and the remembrance of his quixotic haste in
calling up his sweetheart's father caused a pang of remorse to shoot
through me and I put out my hand and stopped him.

"I beg your pardon, Rhodes.  I did not mean to be brutal, but the
facts--"

The tense line of his white lips relaxed into a sickly smile.

"Yes, the facts--I know.  I am not in a position to resent being
reminded of them.  But, I have made up my mind to tell the cashier."

We left the room together, and I walked with him along the outer
corridor to the cashier's door, where the stenographer said he had
gone out, and we found the president would not be down until one
o'clock.

"See here, Rhodes," I said with sudden determination, "I'm going to
do what I can in this matter.  Is there any reason why it will become
known as a matter of course?"

"The first of the month, a week from to-morrow, will be the triple
checking-up time."

"Very well, just you hold off this morning, anyhow.  You will
probably have three-quarters of an hour for lunch; meet me at Haan's
at 12:15."

"All right.  Good-morning."

After I had gone twenty yards from the bank I was sorry that I had
made the engagement.  It was not in the line of my duty to my client,
Mr. Anderson, and I was likely to become unprofitably involved with
young Rhodes.  I saw, even without thought, that there were two
alternatives.  Either he had taken the bonds or they had been removed
overnight from the vault, and I believed he was telling the truth
when he said the vault was all right in the morning, for if it had
not been, he would have eagerly seized on the circumstance; and
furthermore, the fact would have been known by the other officials
and the state of peace which I had found on entering would not have
existed.  There was but one thing to think: Rhodes had taken the
bonds, or was shielding the thief.

I related the case to Betts when I reached the office, and he laughed
incredulously:

"Say, Duncan," he said, "that is a bit too wild a tale for me.
Twelve hundred thousand dollars gone from a time-locked bank vault
overnight without opening it!  Gee!  Why don't you consult that man
Rand, Lawrence Rand, the fellow who has been untying some of those
hard knots out West?  Don't you remember the Johnstone mirror
poisoning case and the Rebstock mines affair?"

"Yes, I do.  Is Rand his name?  Where is he to be found?"

"Jordan went up to his place one night--I think it is in
Fifty-seventh Street, in some apartment house.  Here, look him up in
the telephone book."

I found him entered there.  "Lawrence Rand, Special Agent.  32088
Plaza."  And calling him up made an engagement for an hour later.

I was ushered into the reception-room of his apartment by a
dark-skinned young giant, whom I at first thought a negro, but as I
saw him in the full light and noted his straight hair and heavy
coppery features, I was surprised to find he was a full-blooded
Indian.  He was dressed in clothes that did not seem compatible with
the rank of a servant.

Rand entered with a brisk step, a frank smile on his keen face.  As
he gripped my hand I realized that far more physical power was in his
possession than one would think by his frame, of medium height and
slender almost to thinness.  It was afterward that I found every inch
of him was whipcord and steel.

We sat down in the inner room and I told him the story of Rhodes and
the bonds.  When I had finished he frowned ever so slightly and said,
"Is that all?"

I thought I had been rather explicit.  So I replied with a little
rigor: "That seems to cover the case."

"Do you know whether there is one night-watchman or two?  What is the
make of the safe?  Have there ever been any attempts at robbery of
the bank?  Are all of the members of the bank staff present this
morning?  Has the president been on the right side of the market for
the past year?"

The questions came like shots from a rapid-fire gun.  He did not wait
for me to answer.

"I see you do not know.  We will waste no time.  You are to meet
young Rhodes at lunch.  I want you to invite me, too, for I want to
see him."

We took a Sixth Avenue train to Rector Street, and at 12:15 chose our
seats in a corner compartment in Haan's.  We had been at the table a
moment when Rhodes, still very pale, entered and looked around for
me.  As I introduced him to Rand, I noticed that the latter, after
looking the bank clerk full in the eyes a second, let his gaze play
like lightning over Rhodes's head and features, and before we sat
down he even sought a pretext to step behind Rhodes and look at the
back of his head.

Rhodes was subjected to a severe questioning at once, and some of the
queries seemed to be anything but relevant, and in sum were meant to
make sure that it was impossible for any one but Rhodes to take the
bonds at any time the safe was open.  After the books and cash had
been checked out, Rhodes said, a sliding steel screen was drawn over
the approach to the vault at such times as he was not inside to get
or replace papers or securities ordered out on written slip by some
one of the officers.  He was sure the bonds could not have been given
out by mistake on a slip for other securities because the list
tallied.

"Then either you took the bonds or they were extracted from the safe
after the time-lock was set, and the time-lock being all right up to
the present minute, you are facing toward Sing Sing," summarized
Rand, tilting his cigar and spilling salt into his beer.

Rhodes looked down and swallowed hard at something in his throat, but
could not answer.

"Who made the vault, when and where?" asked Rand.

"Mahler, in 1890, in Cincinnati."

"Hm, is that so--a Mahler vault, eh?  Did I understand you to say the
watchman is an old Irishman named Hanahan, has been at the bank
twenty years and has considerable property?  How do you know about
his property?"

"When I was on accounts he always had fifteen or twenty thousand on
time deposits, and drew some large checks or made heavy deposits when
Mr. Anderson bought or sold property for him--"

"Whom did you say, Mr. Anderson?  The real estate agent who sent Mr.
Duncan to see you?"

"Yes, Mr. Martin Anderson.  He is Hanahan's agent.  They were old
volunteer firemen together in Williamsburg shortly after they came to
this country."

"Indeed!  How do you know that?"

"Well, one evening shortly after I met Marie, I went to call on her
and she said her father was not at home; that he was down at our bank
chatting with Hanahan and having a smoke.  Then she told me about
their having belonged to the same fire company.  After the old man
had taken a dislike to me and threatened to shoot me if I came to the
house again, I used to watch for Hanahan's check, for every time he
drew, I knew he was expecting to see Mr. Anderson and I would go up
to the house.  I never missed it."

Rand smiled as if he enjoyed the humor in the instance.  He thought a
moment and then said:

"Well, now, if you will go back to the bank I will be over presently
accompanied by a man from the Broadway office of Mahler's, and you
will be asked to show us the vault.  Please do not indicate that you
know me."

When Rhodes was gone, Rand turned to me quickly and said: "Mr.
Duncan, kindly go over to Mr. Robert Steele in Hargan's office in
Wall Street and tell him I sent you.  Ask him whether any government
fours of '90 have been in evidence in the market recently.  Meet me
in half an hour at the telephone booth in the Park Row drug store."

I hurried to the office of the great firm of Hargan & Company and
sent in my card to Mr. Steele with "through Mr. Rand" on the corner.
I was ushered in immediately.

"Mr. Steele, I was sent here by Mr. Rand to inquire whether there
have been any '90 government fours on the market in more than the
usual quantity recently?"

At the question he started visibly and whirled abruptly around in his
desk chair to face me.  He stared at me a moment as if weighing his
words forthcoming.

"Well--yes," he said slowly, dropping his eyes in a manner that was
anything but frank.  "Yes, there have been--some."  He paused and
looked up at me again, took off his glasses, and, wiping them
tentatively, put them on and looked me full in the face as if decided
on his course.

"Since Mr. Rand sent you, it must be all right, for we trust Mr. Rand
thoroughly here.  Tell him that a pile of them has been dumped into
the market in the past week, not into the market exactly, but Strauss
brokers had them and loans on them were used to buy Overland Pacific
at an average of 87, and when it reached 161 last Thursday, whoever
was in this pool began to take profits as nearly as we can tell and
closed out the line at an average of 157.  Of course Overland went to
136, but she is--let me see--let me see--" he looked at the tape--"is
206, so whoever held these bonds must have been outside of Strauss's
pool.  It cost us about three million dollars, and if you can tell me
any more about it I will be very grateful."

I told him there was absolutely nothing of which I knew personally.

Suddenly I remembered that I had not learned even the name of the
president of the Municipal Bank, and if Rand had asked Rhodes at
lunch I had let it slip by me.  Inwardly ashamed of my loose methods,
compared with Rand's thorough ones, I hastened to ask of Mr. Steele,
as a by-matter, being sure that he would know.  I was at the door
ready to go out when the matter flashed into my mind.

"By the way, Mr. Steele," I said, "do you happen to know the
president of the Municipal Bank--"

"J. R. Farrington Smith?"  He jerked his head around sharply toward
me as he interrupted me.  "Indeed I do."  Then he emitted a short,
grating laugh, and continued, looking at me sharply all the while:
"How odd I should be thinking of him also at that moment!  Do you
know, Mr. Duncan, that Strauss is or was his broker?  Yet, he was on
the short end of Overland very badly; that I know, to my sorrow."

He dropped his voice to a confidence-inviting tone, and said as he
leaned forward, motioning me to a chair once more:

"Come now, Mr. Duncan, why should we dissemble?  You are evidently
very well informed in this matter.  Did Smith flop and put up those
bonds to go long on Overland?  He made a pretty penny if he did.
Honestly, is that the way he played fast and loose with us?"

I remained standing and put on my hat to further signify that I was
about to go.

"Mr. Steele, to tell the truth, I did not know until a moment ago
that J. R. Farrington Smith is president of the Municipal Bank.  You
have just informed me."

He became very stiff in his manner, and turned to his papers as if
already thinking of them, and said quietly:

"Oh, then we are talking to no purpose.  Good morning, Mr. Duncan."

By a short cut and a brisk walk up Nassau Street I reached the Park
Row drug store on the minute of the half hour.  A man was in the
telephone booth talking, and just outside the half-open door was
Rand, directing the queries that the man was making.  The stranger
was evidently the man from Mahler's.  As I approached Rand motioned
me to silence.

"Well, my books show the number is D186N," the safe man was saying;
"we have no record of complaints or repairs back to '94.  Have you
any before that?--All right, I'll hold the wire.--Hello, yes.  You
have none at all.  Now, what is the pattern of the
time-lock?--Neilson patent, yes.--  Well, who superintended the
Secret Construction Room when this one was made?--The old man
himself, eh?--Where is Neilson now?--How long has he been
dead?--Well, was his brother-in-law working with him in 1890?--Wait a
moment--"

He kept the receiver to his ear and turned to Rand.

"Is there anything else you wish me to ask, Mr. Rand?"

"Inquire if there has ever been any trouble with any D class vaults.
That will be all."

The safe man repeated the question into the 'phone; received the
answer, hung up the receiver, turned around and said:

"None but an attempt to blow one open in the Produce Exchange in
Springfield.  It failed.  He says the man who controlled the secret
measurements on that set of vaults was the patentee of the time-lock
and he is dead.  The measurements are sealed and filed.  The patents
went to his brother-in-law, who worked with him, who sold them
outright to the company for a song."

"What was his name?" asked Rand, with disappointment in his voice and
manner.

"They have no record and do not remember.  He was just a drunken
thick-headed Swede."

When Rand was paying the telephone toll the clerk figured on the rate
to Cincinnati, so I knew they had been talking to the Mahler offices
at the factory.  I told Rand just what had happened in Steele's
office, and he smiled slightly and said:

"Well, well, the lost bonds or others have been used as collateral
for a week past, eh, and Farrington Smith was on the wrong side of
the market?  I do not think Rhodes will 'do any time' if he is
clever.  I have learned that he was a favorite employee of Smith's.
Let us go over to the Municipal."

At the bank, the man from Mahler's spoke a moment to the cashier and
received his permission to show the vault to "two prospective
customers," and a boy was sent to tell Rhodes that the visitors had
been accorded the courtesy.

As we passed the president's inner office door, I saw Smith at his
desk and noticed how pale and careworn he appeared.  I saw that Rand
observed it also.

Rhodes admitted us to the enclosure, and, according to Rand's
previous instructions, gave us no sign of recognition.  Rand and the
man from Mahler's examined the interior of the electrically lighted
vault.  The safe man tapped the floor all around with the stick he
carried, sounding for concealed tunneling, but the inspection was
unfruitful.  The place was in perfect order, and the lock responded
repeatedly to the safe man's skilled touch in a way that showed it
was in excellent condition.  Rand had been standing still, looking
carefully at everything within range of his keen eyes, stroking his
silver-touched hair lightly with one hand in a way I have observed
many times since.

Suddenly he pulled out his watch, looked at the dial of the
time-lock, then at his watch, then at the bank clock, an electrically
regulated affair hung on the wall.  The clock read 2 P.M. to the
second.

"I beg pardon," said Rand to Rhodes.  "What time is it by your watch?"

Rhodes took out his timepiece, and said: "I have two o'clock flat."

I now noticed that the dial of the time-lock stood 1.58:30.

"When did you notice that the clock of the time-lock was slow?"

"It is slow, isn't it?  Why, I had forgot that.  It was last Monday
morning, a week ago.  I remember I was a little late," replied Rhodes.

"Has any one swept in here since?"

Rand asked this with his eyes fixed on a dark corner at the heel of
the right door.

"No, not in the vault."

Rand stooped and put his hand into the corner.  For a moment I
thought he was picking up something, but he straightened up and
brushed his fingers one against the other as if ridding them of dust,
so I knew his hands were empty.

In a moment he signified he was through and we left the place, and at
the corner parted with the man from Mahler's.  We walked on toward my
office.

"What do you make of that?" said Rand suddenly, and I saw that he was
holding something toward me between his thumb and forefinger.  I was
sure he had put neither hand in his pockets since we had left the
bank.

The small, bright object was merely a plain, smooth-worn bit of
steel, thinner than a penny, and not as broad, with a small round
hole in the centre.  Just a tiny disk of steel.

"Did you pick that up in the vault?" I asked.

"Yes, out of that dark corner by the door."

"Why, how is that?  I saw your hands as you rose and they were empty."

"Oh, no, you were mistaken, just as that man from Mahler's was.  I
merely palmed the disk, that is all, so he could not see it.  There
is no reason why he should be on the inside of this case.  He thinks
too much of his own cleverness as it is."

"Well, what is this thing?" I said, slightly irritated at having been
so easily tricked.

"I wish I could answer that question as easily as you ask it,"
replied Rand, and relapsed into silence.

As we entered the building in which I had my office, there emerged
from an elevator car that had just descended a girl, whose appearance
caught my attention.  She was attired in a dark street suit that set
her small, trim figure to advantage, but by contrast emphasized the
pallor of her face.  Her hair was of that abundant flaxen quality so
often seen in Germans and Scandinavians, and her eyes were large and
dark blue.  They were very troubled and it was plain she had been
crying.  There was something bravely piteous in every line of her
face.  She paused a moment as if half expecting some one and hurried
out as we entered the next up-bound car.

When I went into the office, Betts came in with a slip of paper in
his hand.  After I had introduced him to Rand, he said:

"Duncan, for shame not to be in when nice young ladies call on you.
The pretty daughter of your old real estate client, Anderson, was
just here.  She has received a letter from the young fellow who took
those bonds in which he says he wishes her to forget him.  She
refuses to believe he is guilty, and has had a scene with her father,
who must have told her that he has retained you, for she came down
here demanding that you take her to see the young chap, wherever he
is locked up.  Has he been arrested yet?"

"No," I said, "he is over in the bank."

"I think he will be there for some time yet," observed Rand, looking
out the window.

"Well, she will be back in half an hour," said Betts, laying down the
strip of paper on my desk.  "She did not have a card and wrote her
name.  Excuse me, Mr. Rand, I am not through with my correspondence
yet, and it will soon be three o'clock."

As Betts went out Rand rose and looked at the strip with the name
written in a tall, delicate hand, "Miss Marie Neilson Anderson."

In a short time Miss Anderson came into the outer office and I
brought her in and closed the door.  With trembling lips and tears
constantly ready to fall, she repeated what she had already told
Betts and demanded that I arrange an interview with Rhodes at once.

I reassured her to the best of my ability.  Rand sat quiet and said
nothing.  I thought he might at least have repeated to her what he
had just said to Betts, though I could not exactly make out what were
his grounds for the statement.  Instead, just before she was leaving,
much comforted and calmer, he said:

"Excuse me, Miss Anderson, when did you last see Mr. Rhodes?"

"Oh, I have had a letter from him nearly every day, but I have not
talked with him since Sunday night a week ago, when he came to see me
at the house."

"How long have you known him?"

"Nearly two years."

"How did you meet him?"

"Why, he knew papa at the bank, and one day when papa was ill he sent
for George to come up to the house to get some papers about his
accounts and papa introduced us.  When we were first engaged, he did
not seem to dislike George, and often sat talking with him about
matters in the bank and other things."

"By the way, how old are you, Miss Anderson?"

She did not seem to mind the blunt question and replied quickly:

"I am twenty-one."

"Were you born in this country?"

"Yes, I was born in New York."

"Thank you, kindly; that is all," said Rand, and was promptly so deep
in thought that he barely rose and bowed as she left a few minutes
later.  He kept his feet and put on his hat as if he, too, were going.

"I believe you told me that you were to go to Anderson's house
to-night and report, did you not?" he asked.

"Yes, I am sorry that I can not make a better showing both for my
client and for Rhodes."

"I suppose you mean that you hoped a man of my reputation would have
offered better support to you in yours," he observed with a quizzical
smile that nettled me as he walked over to the door.

"I should like to go with you, Mr. Duncan," he continued.  "I will
meet you at the northwest corner of Gramercy Park at eight o'clock.
Will you be so kind as to bring young Rhodes with you?  'Phone him at
the bank, now, and you might come prepared for anything in the way of
a fight for--we will close up the case to-night."

He shut the door and went out.  I was wild to call him back and get
an explanation, but pride restrained me.

That evening Rhodes met me by appointment at the Fifth Avenue Hotel
and we walked over to the corner Rand had named.  We had been
standing there a moment when a carriage drove up, stopped, and Rand
alighted, followed by J. R. Farrington Smith and the brawny Indian.

I could see by the street light that Smith was very white, and the
Indian kept just at his elbow and a little behind him as they
advanced to meet us.  Rand presented me to Smith, who bowed coldly.
If Smith and Rhodes exchanged salutations I did not notice it.  Rand
said to me as we walked along to the house after he had told the
cabman to wait for him:

"Will you kindly ask Mr. Anderson to see Mr. Duncan and some
gentlemen?"

I was angry with him for a number of small things which had occurred
during the day, but more than ever now for bringing Smith into the
case, and at Anderson's house, a proceeding which would be sure to
involve Anderson and his daughter in the expos√© that must occur in so
short a time.

A little maid admitted us at a door beside Anderson's real estate
office, and passed back along a narrow hall and up to a
well-furnished apartment immediately over the offices.  The maid
vanished through porti√®res, and I judged by the sounds that she found
Anderson in the third room to the rear.  I could hear him clearing
his throat as he came.

As he stepped through the porti√®res, I saw he was a man of fifty, of
good appearance, short and heavy, with large hands and a massive jaw.
His eyes were very small and nearly hidden by the overfolding
wrinkles about them.

"Good-evening, gentlemen," he said cheerily, looking about in a
pleasant though puzzled way.  I rose and went forward, saying:

"I am Mr. Duncan, Mr. Anderson.  I believe you know Mr. Smith and Mr.
Rhodes.  This is Mr. Lawrence Rand, with whom I have consulted in
this matter."

The Indian, whom I scarcely knew how to consider, whether companion
of Rand's or his servant, had stepped back into the shadow by the
porti√®res, and I do not think Anderson saw him, so I made no
reference to him whatever.  I was very busy thinking just what to say
and how to say it, for Rand's bringing Smith with him showed Smith
was informed in part or wholly, and was so unexpected that I had had
no chance to ask him aside just what the situation was.  He left me
in no uncertainty.  He gracefully superseded me in the initiative by
drawing back a chair at a small table in the centre of the room, in
the full glow of the shaded light, and saying:

"Would you mind sitting here, please, Mr. Anderson?  I shall want you
to write something in a moment and it will be more convenient for
you."

Anderson sat down, as requested, and turned his face toward Rand as
if he knew where the power lay.  I could see the arteries in his neck
throbbing.  I noticed that Rhodes was very pale, and the bank
president was laboring under great excitement.

"Now, to be brief, gentlemen, we are about to adjust this matter of
the disappearance of twelve hundred thousand dollars' worth of bonds
from the vault of the Municipal Bank."

Rand spoke in a soft even voice.  I think I was the only man who
moved a muscle.  I could see that at least Anderson's blood did not
quicken any.  His eyes may have turned toward Rhodes.  I could not
tell.  Rand went on:

"Before I say anything further, I wish to remind the interested
parties that I have brought an officer with me and any violence would
be inadvisable.

"Mr. Anderson, you will kindly turn over to Mr. Smith that packet of
'90 government fours.  Mr. Smith will give you a receipt in full.
You will also give Mr. Smith your order on Strauss & Company for four
hundred thousand dollars, which is approximately what Mr. Smith lost
when caught short on Overland Pacific ten days ago, and also your
order to Mr. George Rhodes for the remainder of your profits when you
went long on Overland Pacific this last week by using the Municipal
Bank as an involuntary partner.  You will also give your consent to
his marriage with your daughter.  Mr. Duncan here will arrange the
matter of fees and that will close the incident.  _If you do not, Mr.
Smith will prosecute you and I will furnish the evidence.  If Mr.
Smith does not perform his share I will, in behalf of Mr. Rhodes,
inform the bank directors of his hand in Overland.  Kindly do as I
have requested, Mr. Anderson._"

The old fellow never changed color one whit, nor did the throbbing of
the arteries in his neck increase.  They diminished, if anything.  A
bitter sneer came on his face, and as he spoke he dropped into very
broken English.

"Vot iss diss nonsense, Meester, vot-afer-your nem-iss?  Vot a ni'ice
liddle scheme bote _Ah don't ma'eke no mohney baycoss Ah aindt got
dey bonts-s--_"

Rand held up a forefinger and the old man stopped.  He was now
breathing hard and was flushed.  Rand drew from his vest pocket and
laid on the table before Anderson the _little steel disk_.

Before Rand could speak, the porti√®res parted, and in the opening
stood Marie Anderson, very white and drawn up to her full height.  In
one hand she extended the packet with the typewritten slip still on
the end.

"Father," she said slowly, in a low, tense voice, "here are the
bonds.  By accident I just found them in a jar on the sideboard."

With surprising quickness Anderson drew out a drawer in the table at
which he sat, snatched up a revolver, leaped to the doorway,
thrusting his daughter aside, but as he turned and fired pointblank
at Rand, who had vaulted the table to reach him, the Indian knocked
up the muzzle of the revolver from behind.  The bullet struck the
ceiling and the next instant Anderson was on the floor, helpless in
the bearlike clasp of the big red man.

The girl had reeled as if about to faint.  Rhodes had sprung to her
assistance, but she recovered herself and seemed to be anxious to get
away from her father, as if from a reptile.  Rhodes led her to the
other side of the room.

"Take the gun away from him and set him on the chair again, Tom,"
said Rand, as if nothing had happened.  He returned to his own seat,
and we too sat down.

In fifteen seconds the smoke floating about the ceiling was the only
sign of the crisis just passed.  Rand began again:

"In order to give you an opportunity to recover your composure before
you begin writing, Mr. Anderson, and to prevent your indulging in any
more foolish lies, I will tell you the evidence against you.  You
helped your brother-in-law, Neilson, make the time-lock on the vault
ordered for the Municipal Bank in 1890.  You inserted in the journal
of the main standard of the clock works a steel disk instead of a
brass one, knowing that the steel against steel would make a friction
that would wear out both in several years' time.  By means of a
second time-lock accurately duplicated, and which, if I am not
mistaken, is ticking away in that black box on the mantel behind you,
you were able to tell very nearly the very hour when you could turn
back the bolts of the Municipal vault without let or hindrance.  When
your brother-in-law died, you sold his patents to the company,
returned to New York, and began to live for the hour when you could
help yourself to whatever you wished.  You stopped drinking and
settled down.  You went into the real estate business because you
could obtain in that manner a permanent hold on Hanahan, the watchman
at the Municipal, whom you already knew, and you drew him into the
habit of seeing you on business regularly at the bank at night.  You
have his perfect confidence.  When you found that about the time you
were ready to make your haul George Rhodes would be the young man in
charge of the vault, you called him to the house on a pretext and
made him acquainted with your daughter and encouraged his visits that
you might get from him in your chats, bit by bit, knowledge of just
what to put your hand on in the short time you were in the vault, and
how to conceal the theft long enough for you to convert the
securities.  This is one of the deepest and cleverest criminal plots
of which I have ever heard.  Your life for all these years has been
devoted to it.  I am not surprised that you succeeded.  Your one
mistake was in giving so flimsy a pretext to Mr. Duncan for calling
him up and retaining him.  That attracted my attention to you.  What
you really wanted was to be able to have constant information from
Mr. Duncan when he should become Rhodes's counsel in the natural
course of events, as to efforts to explain the disappearance of the
bonds in order to defend Rhodes.  In that way you would always know
how close he was on the track of the real thief, Mr. Martin Anderson.
Few men pay attorneys $500 retaining fees to persuade young men who
really love their daughters from dragging them into a scandal which
does not essentially concern the daughters at best.  You were
surprised into this mistake when Rhodes called you up and
crystallized your plan to force your choice of counsel on him too
hastily.

"On Sunday night a week ago you went to the bank, as your duplicate
time-lock showed you the steel disk was worn so thin a jar on the
door would cause the standard to drop and the lock to release.
Hanahan, as he told me an hour ago, went across the street for some
tobacco that Sunday night, leaving you in the bank.  In ninety
seconds you had opened the vault, taken the right packet, opened the
case of the time-lock, replaced the disk with a brass one, closed the
case, and closed the vault, but--_you carelessly dropped this worn
disk on the floor_.

"You used the bonds as collateral to buy stock, not as a speculation,
but as an investment that would conceal the bonds, and by chance
chose Overland Pacific at a low figure and it rose.  You thought best
to take your profits, and only your greed prevented you from
returning the bonds to Rhodes by mail.  As we have seen, you had not
thought long enough or deeply enough what you would do with your
lifetime harvest after you got it in your hands, and suddenly you
found yourself out of your depth.  You hid the bonds in a jar, just
like a foolish old woman.  But I must compliment you on your clear
thinking and previous planning.  I have never known of anything so
deliberate, and only a phlegmatic Scandinavian would be capable of
it, especially to end up with such good nerves as you have shown
to-night.  Mr. Smith does not wish to prosecute you and expose his
speculations.  Since Mr. Smith and Mr. Duncan doubtless have other
engagements to-night, kindly write as I requested a few minutes ago."

Muttering objurgations in his native tongue, Anderson wrote the two
drafts, Rhodes's being for more than one hundred thousand, and both
Rhodes and Smith receipted.  Smith took the bonds and thrust them
into his overcoat pocket.  Miss Anderson refused to remain an hour
longer under her father's roof, and left the house to go to the home
of a distant relative.  I pocketed the odd little steel disk, which
lies before me as I write, with a slip copied from a page of Rand's
notebook that lays out so plainly and simply his quick, sure, and
unerring processes in this remarkable case, that I can not refrain
from giving it.

(1) Anderson's retaining Duncan very strange.

(2) Rhodes's cranium shows moral incapacity for theft.  Innocent.

(3) Neilson's brother-in-law could know lock construction.

(4) Smith lost speculating.  Thief won half million with bonds.

(5) Time-clock lost 90 sec. Sunday night, week before discovery.

(6) Disk of steel instead of brass.  Meant to wear out.  Is discarded
part of lock.  Must be a new disk in lock.  Work of expert.  Prepared
since making of lock.

(7) Marie _Neilson_ Anderson.

(8) Anderson was alone in bank 3 min.  Sunday night of robbery.

Anderson guilty.  Proved and confessed.  Adjusted, no proceedings, by
L. R.




THE CHRONICLES OF ADDINGTON PEACE

BY B. FLETCHER ROBINSON

_Fletcher Robinson is a London journalist, the editor of "Vanity
Fair," and author of a dozen detective stories in which are recorded
the startling adventures of Mr. Addington Peace of Scotland Yard.  He
collaborated with Conan Doyle in "The Hound of the Baskervilles."
When some of these stories appeared in the American magazines, for an
unexplained reason (presumably editorial) the name of the hero was
changed to Inspector Hartley._



THE CHRONICLES OF ADDINGTON PEACE

By B. FLETCHER ROBINSON


THE VANISHED MILLIONAIRE

I, James Phillips, stood with my back to the fire, smoking and
puzzling over it.  It was worth all the headlines the newspapers had
given it; there was no loophole to the mystery.

Both sides of the Atlantic knew Silas J. Ford.  He had established a
business reputation in America that had made him a celebrity in
England from the day he stepped off the liner.  Once in London his
syndicates and companies and consolidations had startled the
slow-moving British mind.  The commercial sky of the United Kingdom
was overshadowed by him and his schemes.  The papers were full of
praise and blame, of puffs and denunciations.  He was a millionaire;
he was on the verge of a smash that would paralyze the markets of the
world.  He was an abstainer, a drunkard, a gambler, a most religious
man.  He was a confirmed bachelor, a woman hater; his engagement was
to be announced shortly.  So was the gossip kept rolling with the
limelight always centred upon the spot where Silas J. Ford happened
to be standing.

And now he had disappeared, vanished, evaporated.

On the night of December 18, a Thursday, he had left London for
Meudon Hall, the fine old Hampshire mansion that he had rented from
Lord Beverley.  The two most trusted men in his office accompanied
him.  Friday morning he had spent with them; but at three o'clock the
pair had returned to London, leaving their chief behind.  From four
to seven he had been shut up with his secretary.  It was a hard time
for every one, a time verging upon panic, and at such times Silas J.
Ford was not an idle man.

At eight o'clock he had dined.  His one recreation was music, and
after the meal he had played the organ in the picture gallery for an
hour.  At a quarter past eleven he retired to his bedroom, dismissing
Jackson, his body servant, for the night.  Three-quarters of an hour
later, however, Harbord, his secretary, had been called to the
private telephone, for Mr. Ford had brought an extension wire from
the neighboring town of Camdon.  It was a London message, and so
urgent that he decided to wake his chief.  There was no answer to his
knock, and on entering the room he found that Mr. Ford was not in
bed.  He was surprised, but in no way suspicious, and started to
search the house.  He was joined by a footman, and, a little later,
by Jackson and the butler.  Astonishment changed to alarm.  Other
servants were roused to aid in the quest.  Finally, a party, provided
with lanterns from the stables, commenced to examine the grounds.

Snow had fallen early in the day, covering the great lawns in front
of the entrance porch with a soft white blanket, about an inch in
thickness.  It was the head groom who struck the trail.  Apparently
Mr. Ford had walked out of the porch, and so over the drive and
across the lawn toward the wall that bounded the public road.  This
road, which led from Meudon village to the town of Camdon, crossed
the front of Meudon Hall at a distance of some quarter of a mile.

There was no doubt as to the identity of the footprints, for Silas
Ford affected a broad, square-toed boot, easily recognizable from its
unusual impression.

They tracked him by their lanterns to the park wall, and there all
trace of him disappeared.  The wall was of rough stone, easily
surmountable by an active man.  The snow that covered the road
outside had been churned into muddy paste by the traffic of the day;
there were no further footprints observable.

The party returned to the house in great bewilderment.  The telephone
to London brought no explanation, and the following morning Mr.
Harbord caught the first train to town to make inquiries.  For
private reasons his friends did not desire publicity for the affair,
and it was not until the late afternoon, when all their
investigations had proved fruitless, that they communicated with
Scotland Yard.  When the papers went to press the whereabouts of the
great Mr. Ford still remained a mystery.

In keen curiosity I set off up the stairs to Inspector Peace's room.
Perhaps the little detective had later news to give me.

I found him standing with his back to the fire puffing at his
cigarette with a plump solemnity.  A bag, neatly shaped, lay on the
rug at his feet.  He nodded a welcome, watching me over his glasses.

"I expected you, Mr. Phillips," he said.  "And how do you explain it?"

"A love affair or temporary insanity," I suggested vaguely.

"Surely we can combine those solutions," he smiled.  "Anything else?"

"No.  I came to ask your opinion."

"My mind is void of theories, Mr. Phillips, and I shall endeavor to
keep it so for the present.  If you wish to amuse yourself by
discussing possibilities, I would suggest your consideration of the
reason why, if he wanted to disappear quietly, he should leave so
obvious a track through the snow of his own lawn.  For myself, as I
am leaving for Camdon via Waterloo Station in ten minutes, I shall
hope for more definite data before night."

"Peace," I asked him eagerly, "may I come with you?"

"If you can be ready in time," he said.

It was past two o'clock when we arrived at the old town of Camdon.  A
carriage met us at the station.  Five minutes more and we were clear
of the narrow streets and climbing the first bare ridge of the downs.
It was a desolate prospect enough--a bare expanse of wind-swept land
that rose and fell with the sweeping regularity of the Pacific swell.
Here and there a clump of ragged firs showed black against the snow.
Under that gentle carpet the crisp turf of the crests and the broad
plow lands of the lower ground alike lay hidden.  I shivered, drawing
my coat more closely about me.

It was half an hour later that we topped a swelling rise and saw the
gray towers of the ancient mansion beneath us.  In the shelter of the
valley by the quiet river, that now lay frozen into silence, the
trees had grown into splendid woodlands, circling the hall on the
further side.  From the broad front the white lawns crept down to the
road on which we were driving.  Dark masses of shrubberies and the
tracery of scattered trees broke their silent curves.  The park wall
that fenced them from the road stood out like an ink line ruled upon
paper.

"It must have been there that he disappeared," I cried, with a
speculative finger.

"So I imagine," said Peace.  "And if he has spent two nights on the
Hampshire downs, he will be looking for a fire to-day.  You have
rather more than your fair share of the rug, Mr. Phillips, if you
will excuse my mentioning it."

A man was standing on the steps of the entrance porch when we drove
up.  As we unrolled ourselves he stepped forward to help us.  He was
a thin, pale-faced fellow, with fair hair and indeterminate eyes.

"My name is Harbord," he said.  "You are Inspector Addington Peace, I
believe."

His hand shook as he stretched it out in a tremulous greeting.
Plainly the secretary was afraid, visibly and anxiously afraid.

"Mr. Ransome, the manager of Mr. Ford's London office, is here," he
continued.  "He is waiting to see you in the library."

We followed him through a great hall into a room lined with books
from floor to ceiling.  A stout, dark man, who was pacing it like a
beast in a cage, stopped at the sight of us.  His face, as he turned
it toward us, looked pinched and gray in the full light.

"Inspector Peace, eh?" he said.  "Well, Inspector, if you want a
reward, name it.  If you want to pull the house down, only say the
word.  But find him for us, or, by heaven, we're done."

"Is it as bad as that?"

"You can keep a secret, I suppose.  Yes--it couldn't well be worse.
It was a tricky time; he hid half his schemes in his own head; he
never trusted even me altogether.  If he were dead I could plan
something, but now--"

He thumped his hand on the table and turned away to the window.

"When you last saw Mr. Ford was he in good health?  Did he stand the
strain?"

"Ford had no nerves.  He was never better in his life."

"In these great transactions he would have his enemies.  If his plans
succeeded there would be many hard hit, perhaps ruined.  Have you any
suspicion of a man who, to save himself, might make away with Mr.
Ford?"

"No," said the manager after a moment's thought.  "No, I can not give
you a single name.  The players are all big men, Inspector.  I don't
say that their consciences would stop them from trying such a trick,
but it wouldn't be worth their while.  They hold off when jail is the
certain punishment."

"Was this financial crisis in his own affairs generally known?"

"Certainly not."

"Who would know of it?"

"There might be a dozen men on both sides of the Atlantic who would
suspect the truth.  But I don't suppose that more than four people
were actually in possession of the facts."

"And who would they be?"

"His two partners in America, myself, and Mr. Harbord there."

Peace turned to the young man with a smile and a polite bow.

"Can you add any names to the list?" he asked.

"No," said Harbord, staring at the detective with a puzzled look, as
if trying to catch the drift of his questions.

"Thank you," said the Inspector; "and now will you show me the place
where this curious disappearance occurred?"

We crossed the drive, where the snow lay torn and trampled by the
carriages, and so to the white, even surface of the lawn.  We soon
struck the trail, a confused path beaten by many footprints.  Peace
stooped for a moment, and then turned to the secretary with an angry
glance.

"Were you with them?" he said.

"Yes."

"Then why, in the name of common sense, didn't you keep them off his
tracks?  You have simply trampled them out of existence, between you."

"We were in a hurry, Inspector," said the secretary meekly.  "We
didn't think about it."

We walked forward, following the broad trail until we came to a
circular patch of trodden snow.  Evidently the searchers had stopped
and stood talking together.  On the further side I saw the footprints
of a man plainly defined.  There were some half-dozen clear
impressions and they ended at the base of the old wall, which was
some six feet in height.

"I am glad to see that you and your friends have left me something,
Mr. Harbord," said the Inspector.

He stepped forward and, kneeling down, examined the nearest footprint.

"Mr. Ford dressed for dinner?" he inquired, glancing up at the
secretary.

"Certainly!  Why do you ask?"

"Merely that he had on heavy shooting boots when he took this evening
stroll.  It will be interesting to discover what clothes he wore."

The Inspector walked up to the wall, moving parallel to the tracks in
the snow.  With singular activity for his plump and unathletic figure
he climbed to the top and seated himself while he stared about him.
Then on his hands and knees he began to crawl forward along the
coping.  It was a quaint spectacle, but the extraordinary care and
vigilance of the little man took the farce out of it.

Presently he stopped and looked down at us with a gentle smile.

"Please stay where you are," he said, and disappeared on the further
side.

Harbord offered me a cigarette, and we waited with due obedience till
the Inspector's bullet-head again broke the horizon as he struggled
back to his position on the coping of the wall.

He seemed in a very pleasant temper when he joined us; but he said
nothing of his discoveries, and I had grown too wise to inquire.
When we reached the entrance hall he asked for Jackson, the valet,
and in a couple of minutes the man appeared.  He was a tall,
hatchet-faced fellow, very neatly dressed in black.  He made a little
bow, and then stood watching us in a most respectful attitude.

"A queer business this, Jackson," said Addington Peace.

"Yes, sir."

"And what is your opinion on it?"

"To be frank, sir, I thought at first that Mr. Ford had run away; but
now I don't know what to make of it."

"And why should he run away?"

"I have no idea, sir; but he seemed to me rather strange in his
manner yesterday."

"Have you been with him long?"

"No, sir.  I was valet to the Honorable John Dorn, Lord Beverley's
second son.  Mr. Ford took me from Mr. Dorn at the time he rented the
Hall."

"I see.  And now will you show me your master's room?  I shall see
you again later, Mr. Harbord," he continued; "in the meanwhile I will
leave my assistant with you."

We sat and smoked in the secretary's room.  He was not much of a
talker, consuming cigarette after cigarette in silence.  The winter
dusk had already fallen when the Inspector joined us, and we retired
to our rooms to prepare for dinner.  I tried a word with Peace upon
the staircase, but he shook his head and walked on.

The meal dragged itself to an end somehow, and we left Ransome with a
second decanter of port before him.  Peace slipped away again, and I
consoled myself with a book in the library until half-past ten, when
I walked off to bed.  A servant was switching off the light in the
hall when I mounted the great staircase.

My room was in the old wing at the further side of the picture
gallery, and I had some difficulty in steering my way through the
dark corridors.  The mystery that hung over the house had shaken my
nerves, and I remember that I started at every creak of a board and
peered into the shadows as I passed along with, Heaven knows, what
ghostly expectations.  I was glad enough to close my door upon them
and see the wood fire blazing cheerfully in the open hearth.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

I woke with a start that left me sitting up in bed, with my heart
thumping in my ribs like a piston rod.  I am not generally a light
sleeper, but that night, even while I snored, my nerves were active.
Some one had tapped at my door--that was my impression.

I listened with the uncertain fear that comes to the newly waked.
Then I heard it again--on the wall near my head this time.  A board
creaked.  Some one was groping his way down the dark corridor
without.  Presently he stopped, and a faint line of illumination
sprang out under my door.  It winked, and then grew still.  He had
lighted a candle.

Assurance came with the streak of light.  What was he doing, groping
in the dark, if he had a candle with him?  I crept over to the door,
opened it, and stared cautiously out.

About a dozen feet away a man was standing, a striking figure against
the light he carried.  His back was toward me, but I could see that
his hand was shading the candle from his eyes while he stared into
the shadows that clung about the further end of the corridor.

Presently he began to move forward.

The picture gallery and the body of the house lay behind.  The
corridor in which he stood terminated in a window, set deep into the
stone of the old walls.  The man walked slowly, throwing the light to
right and left.  His attitude was of nervous expectation--that of a
man who looked for something that he feared to see.

At the window he stopped, staring about him and listening.  He
examined the fastenings, and then tried a door on his right.  It was
locked against him.  As he did so I caught his profile against the
light.  It was Harbord, the secretary.  From where I stood he was not
more than forty feet away.  There was no possibility of a mistake.

As he turned to come back I retreated into my room, closing the door.
The fellow was in a state of great agitation, and I could hear him
muttering to himself as he walked.  When he had passed by I peeped
out to see him and his light dwindle, reach the corner by the picture
gallery, and fade into a reflection, a darkness.

I took care to turn the key before I got back into bed.

I woke again at seven, and, hurrying on my clothes, set off to tell
Peace all about it.  I took him to the place, and together we
examined the corridor.  There were only two rooms beyond mine.  The
one on the left was occupied by Ransome; that on the right was a
large store-room, the door of which was locked.  The housekeeper kept
the key, we learned upon inquiry.  Whom had Harbord followed?  The
problem was beyond me.  As for Inspector Peace, he did not indulge in
verbal speculations.

It was in the central hall that we encountered the secretary on his
way to the breakfast-room.  The man looked nervous and depressed; he
nodded to us and was passing on, when Peace stopped him.

"Good-morning, Mr. Harbord," he said.  "Can I have a word with you?"

"Certainly, Inspector.  What is it?"

"I have a favor to ask.  My assistant and myself have our hands full
here.  If necessary, could you help us by running up to London and--"

"For the day?" he interrupted.

"No.  It may be an affair of three or four days."

"Then I must refuse.  I am sorry, but--"

"Don't apologize, Mr. Harbord," said the little man, cheerfully.  "I
shall have to find some one else, that is all."

We walked into the breakfast-room, and a few minutes later Ransome
appeared with a great bundle of letters and telegrams in his hand.
He said not a word to any of us, but dropped into a chair, tearing
open the envelopes and glancing at their contents.  His face grew
darker as he read, and once he thumped his hand upon the table with a
crash that set the china jingling.

"Well, Inspector?" he said at last.

The little detective's head shook out a negative.

"Perhaps you require an incentive," he sneered.  "Is it a matter of a
reward?"

"No, Mr. Ransome; but it is becoming one of my personal reputation."

"Then, by thunder, you are in danger of losing it.  Why don't you and
your friend hustle instead of loitering around as if you were paid by
the job?  I tell you, man, there are thousands, hundreds of thousands
melting, slipping through our fingers, every hour of the day."

He sprang from his seat and started his walk again, up and down, up
and down, as we had first seen him.

"Shall you be returning to London?"

At the question the manager halted in his stride, staring sharply
down into the Inspector's bland countenance.

"No," he said; "I shall stay here, Mr. Addington Peace, until such
time as you have something definite to tell me."

"I have an inquiry to make which I would rather place in the hands of
some one who has personal knowledge of Mr. Ford.  Neither Mr. Harbord
nor yourself desire to leave Meudon.  Is there any one else you can
suggest?"

"There is Jackson, Ford's valet," said the manager, after a moment's
thought.  "He can go if you think him bright enough.  I'll send for
him."

While the footman who answered the bell was gone upon his errand we
waited in an uneasy silence.  There was the shadow of an ugly mystery
upon us all.  Jackson, as he entered, was the only one who seemed at
his ease.  He stood there, a tall figure of all the respectabilities.

"The Inspector here wishes you to go to London, Jackson," said the
manager.  "He will explain the details.  There is a fast train from
Camdon at eleven."

"Certainly, sir.  Do I return to-night?"

"No, Jackson," said Peace.  "It will take a day or two."

The man took a couple of steps toward the door, hesitated, and then
returned to his former place.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he began, addressing Ransome.  "But I would
rather remain at Meudon under present circumstances."

"What on earth do you mean?" thundered the manager.

"Well, sir, I was the last to see Mr. Ford.  There is, as it were, a
suspicion upon me.  I should like to be present while the search
continues, both for his sake--and my own."

"Very kind of you, I'm sure," growled Ransome.  "But you either do
what I tell you, Jackson, or you pack your boxes and clear out.  So
be quick and make up your mind."

"I think you are treating me most unfairly, sir.  But I can not be
persuaded out of what I know to be my duty."

"You impertinent rascal!--" began the furious manager.  But Peace was
already on his feet with a chubby hand outstretched.

"Perhaps, after all, I can make other arrangements, Mr. Ransome," he
said.  "It is natural that Jackson should consider his own reputation
in this affair.  That is all, Jackson; you may go now."

It was half an hour afterward, when the end of breakfast had
dispersed the party, that I spoke to Peace about it, offering to go
to London myself and do my best to carry out his instructions.

"I had bad luck in my call for volunteers," he said.

"I should have thought they would have been glad enough to get the
chance of work.  They can find no particular amusement in loafing
about the place all day."

"Doubtless they all had excellent reasons," he said with a smile.
"But, anyway, you can not be spared, Mr. Phillips."

"You flatter me."

"I want you to stay in your bedroom.  Write, read, do what you like,
but keep your door ajar.  If any one passes down the corridor, see
where he goes, only don't let him know that you are watching him if
you can help it.  I will take my turn at half-past one.  I don't mean
to starve you."

I obeyed.  After all, it was, in a manner, promotion that the
Inspector had given me; yet it was a tedious, anxious time.  No one
came my way, barring a sour-looking housemaid.  I tried to argue out
the case, but the deeper I got the more conflicting grew my theories.
I was never more glad to see a friendly face than when the little man
came in upon me.

The short winter's afternoon crept on, the Inspector and I taking
turn and turn about in our sentry duty.  Dinner-time came and went.
I had been off duty from nine, but at ten-thirty I poured out a
whisky and soda and went back to join him.  He was sitting in the
middle of the room smoking a pipe in great apparent satisfaction.

"Bed-time, isn't it?" I grumbled, sniffing at his strong tobacco.

"Oh, no," he said.  "The fact is, we are going to sit up all night."

I threw myself on a couch by the window without reply.  Perhaps I was
not in the best of tempers; certainly I did not feel so.

"You insisted on coming down with me," he suggested.

"I know all about that," I told him.  "I haven't complained, have I?
If you want me to shut myself up for a week I'll do it; but I should
prefer to have some idea of the reason why."

"I don't wish to create mysteries, Mr. Phillips," he said kindly;
"but believe me there is nothing to be gained in vague discussions."

I knew that settled it as far as he was concerned, so I nodded my
head and filled a pipe.  At eleven he walked across the room and
switched off the light.

"If nothing happens you can take your turn in four hours from now,"
he said.  "In the meanwhile get to sleep.  I will keep the first
watch."

I shut my eyes, but there was no rest in me that night.  I lay
listening to the silence of the old house with a dull speculation.
Somewhere far down in the lower floor a great gong-like clock chimed
the hours and quarters.  I heard them every one, from twelve to one,
from one to two.  Peace had stopped smoking.  He sat as silent as a
cat at a mousehole.

It must have been some fifteen minutes after two that I heard the
faint, faint creak of a board in the corridor outside.  I sat up,
every nerve strung to a tense alertness.  And then there came a sound
I knew well, the soft drawing touch of a hand groping in the darkness
as some one felt his way along the paneled walls.  It passed us and
was gone.  Yet Peace never moved.  Could he have fallen asleep?  I
whispered his name.

"Hush!"

The answer came to me like a gentle sigh.

One minute, two minutes more and the room sprang into sight under the
steady glow of an electric hand-lamp.  The Inspector rose from his
seat and slid through the door with me upon his heels.  The light he
carried searched the clustered shadows; but the corridor was empty,
nor was there any place where a man might hide.

"You waited too long," I whispered impatiently.

"The man is no fool, Mr. Phillips.  Do you imagine that he was not
listening and staring like a hunted beast?  A noisy board, a stumble,
or a flash of light, and we should have wasted a tiring day."

"Nevertheless he has got clear away."

"I think not."

As we crept forward I saw that a strip of the oak flooring along the
walls was gray with dust.  If it had been in such a neglected state
in the afternoon I should surely have noticed it.  In some curiosity
I stooped to examine the phenomenon.

"Flour," whispered the little man touching my shoulder.

"Flour?"

"Yes.  I sprinkled it myself.  Look--there is the first result."

He steadied his light as he spoke, pointing with his other hand.  On
the powdery surface was the half footprint of a man.

The flour did not extend more than a couple of feet from the walls,
so that it was only here and there that we caught up the trail.  We
had passed the bedroom on the left--yet the footprints still went on;
we were at the store-room door, yet they still were visible before
us.  There was no other egress from the corridor.  The tall window at
the end was, as I knew, a good twenty feet from the ground.  Had this
man also vanished off the earth like Silas Ford?

Suddenly the inspector stopped, grasping my arm.  The light he held
fell upon two footprints close together.  They were at right angles
to the passage.  Apparently the man had passed into the solid wall!

"Peace, what does this mean?"

You, sir, sitting peaceably at home, with a good light and an easy
conscience, may think I was a timid fool; yet I was afraid--honestly
and openly afraid.  The little detective heard the news of it in my
voice, for he gave me a reassuring pat upon the back.

"Have you never heard of a 'priest's hole'?" he whispered.  "In the
days when Meudon Hall was built, no country house was without its
hiding-place.  Protestants and priests, Royalists and Republicans,
they all used the secret burrow at one time or another."

"How did he get in?"

"That is what we are here to discover, and as I have no wish to
destroy Mr. Ford's old oak panels I think our simplest plan will be
to wait until he comes back again."

The shadows leaped upon us as Peace extinguished the light he
carried.  The great window alone was luminous with the faint
starlight that showed the tracery of its ancient stonework; for the
rest, the darkness hedged us about in impenetrable barriers.  Side by
side, we stood by the wall in which we knew the secret entrance must
exist.

It may have been ten minutes or more when from the
distance--somewhere below our feet, or so it seemed to me--there came
the faint echo of a closing door.  It was only in such cold silence
that we could have heard it.  The time ticked on.  Suddenly, upon the
black of the floor, there shone a thin reflection like the slash of a
sword--a reflection that grew into a broad gush of light as the
sliding panel in the wall, six feet from where we stood, rose to the
full opening.  There followed another pause, during which I could see
Peace draw himself together as if for some unusual exertion.

A shadow darkened the reflection on the floor, and a head came
peering out.  The light but half displayed the face, but I could see
that the teeth were bare and glistening, like those of a man in some
deadly expectation.  The next moment he stepped across the threshold.
With a spring like the rush of a terrier, Addington Peace was upon
him, driving him off his balance with the impact of the blow.  Before
I could reach them, the little detective had him down, though he
still kicked viciously until I lent a hand.  The click of the
handcuffs on his wrist ended the matter.

It was Ford's valet, the man Jackson.

We were not long by ourselves.  I heard a key turned in the lock, and
Ransome burst out of his room into the corridor like an angry bull.
Almost at the same moment there sounded a quick patter of naked feet
from behind us, and Harbord, the secretary, came running up, swinging
a heavy stick in his hand.  They both stopped at the edge of the
patch of light in which we were, staring from us to the gaping hole
in the wall.

"What in thunder are you about?" cried the manager.

"Finding a solution to your problem," said the little detective,
getting to his feet.  "Perhaps, gentlemen, you will be good enough to
follow me."

He stepped through the opening in the wall, and lifted the candle
which the valet had placed on the floor while he was raising the
panel from within.  By its light I could see the first steps of a
flight which led down into darkness.

"We will take Jackson with us," he continued.  "Keep an eye on him,
Mr. Phillips, if you please."

It was a strange procession that we made.  First Peace, with the
candle, then Ransome, with the valet, following, while I and Harbord
brought up the rear.  We descended some thirty steps, formed in the
thickness of the wall, opened a heavy door, and so found ourselves in
a narrow chamber, some twelve feet long by seven broad.  Upon a
mattress at the further end lay a man, gagged and bound.  As the
light fell upon his features, Ransome sprang forward, shouting his
name.

"Silas Ford, by thunder!"

With eager fingers we loosened the gag and cut the ropes that bound
his wrists.  He sat up, turning his long, thin face from one to the
other of us as he stretched the cramp from his limbs.

"Thank you, gentlemen," said he.  "Well, Ransome, how are things?"

"Bad, sir; but it's not too late."

He nodded his head, passing his hands through his hair with a quick,
nervous movement.

"You've caught my clever friend, I see.  Kindly go through his
pockets, will you?  He has something I must ask him to return to me."

We found it in Jackson's pocket-book--a check, antedated a week, for
five thousand pounds, with a covering letter to the manager of the
bank.  Ford took the bit of stamped paper, twisting it to and fro in
his supple fingers.

"It was smart of you, Jackson," he said, addressing the bowed figure
before him: "I give you credit for the idea.  To kidnap a man just as
he was bringing off a big deal--well, you would have earned the
money."

"But how did you get down here?" struck in the manager.

"He told me that he had discovered an old hiding-place--a 'priest's
hole,' he called it--and I walked into the trap as the best man may
do sometimes.  As we got to the bottom of that stairway he slipped a
sack over my head and had me fixed in thirty seconds.  He fed me
himself twice a day, standing by to see I didn't halloo.  When I paid
up he was to have twenty-four hours' start; then he would let you
know where I was.  I held out awhile, but I gave in to-night.  The
delay was getting too dangerous.  Have you a cigarette, Harbord?
Thank you.  And who may you be?"

It was to the detective he spoke.

"My name is Peace, Inspector Addington Peace, from Scotland Yard."

"And I owe my rescue to you?"

The little man bowed.

"You will have no reason to regret it.  And what did they think had
become of me, Inspector?"

"It was the general opinion that you had taken to yourself wings, Mr.
Ford."

. . . . . . . . . . . .

It was as we traveled up to town next day that Peace told me his
story.  I will set it down as briefly as may be.

"I soon came to the conclusion that Ford, whether dead or alive, was
inside the grounds of Meudon Hall.  If he had bolted, for some
reason, by the way, which was perfectly incomprehensible, a man of
his ability would not have left a broad trail across the centre of
his lawn for all to see.  There was, moreover, no trace of him that
our men could ferret out at any station within reasonable distance.
A motor was possible, but there were no marks of its presence next
morning in the mud of the roads.  That fact I learned from a curious
groom who had aided in the search, and who, with a similar idea upon
him, had carefully examined the highway at daybreak.

"When I clambered to the top of the wall I found that the snow upon
the coping had been dislodged.  I traced the marks, as you saw, for
about a dozen yards.  Where they ended I, too, dropped to the ground
outside.  There I made a remarkable discovery.  Upon a little drift
of snow that lay in the shallow ditch beneath were more footprints.
But they were not those of Ford.  They were the marks of long and
narrow boots, which led into the road, where they were lost in the
track of a flock of sheep that had been driven over it the day before.

"I took a careful measurement of those footprints.  They might, of
course, belong to some private investigator; but they gave me an
idea.  Could some man have walked across the lawn in Ford's boots,
changed them to his own on the top of the wall, and so departed?  Was
it the desire of someone to let it be supposed that Ford had run away?

"When I examined Ford's private rooms I was even more fortunate.
From the boot-boy I discovered that the master had three pairs of
shooting boots.  There were three pairs in the stand.  Some one had
made a very serious mistake.  Instead of hiding the pair he had used
on the lawn, he had returned them to their place.  The trick was
becoming evident.  But where was Ford?  In the house or grounds, dead
or alive, but where?

"I was able, through my friend the boot-boy, to examine the boots on
the night of our arrival.  My measurements corresponded with those
that Jackson, the valet, wore.  Was he acting for himself, or was
Harbord, or even Ransome, in the secret?  That, too, it was necessary
to discover before I showed my hand.

"Your story of Harbord's midnight excursion supplied a clue.  The
secretary had evidently followed some man who had disappeared
mysteriously.  Could there be the entrance to a secret chamber in
that corridor?  That would explain the mystification of Harbord as
well as the disappearance of Silas Ford.  If so, Harbord was not
involved.

"If Ford were held a prisoner he must be fed.  His jailer must of
necessity remain in the house.  But the trap I set in the suggested
journey to town was an experiment singularly unsuccessful, for all
the three men I desired to test refused.  However, if I were right
about the secret chamber I could checkmate the blackmailer by keeping
a watch on him from your room, which commanded the line of
communications.  But Jackson was clever enough to leave his
victualing to the night-time.  I scattered the flour to try the
result of that ancient trick.  It was successful.  That is all.  Do
you follow me?"

"Yes," said I; "but how did Jackson come to know the secret hiding
place?"

"He has long been a servant of the house.  You had better ask his old
master." 

Have I ever loved, you ask me, my brother?  Yes, I have loved!  The
story is dread and marvelous, and, for all my threescore years, I
scarce dare stir the ashes of that memory.  To you I can refuse
nothing; to a heart less steeled than yours this tale could never be
told by me.  For these things were so strange that I can scarce
believe they came into my own existence.  Three long years was I the
puppet of a delusion of the devil.  Three long years was I a parish
priest by day, while by night, in dreams (God grant they were but
dreams!), I led the life of a child of this world, of a lost soul!
For one kind glance at a woman's face was my spirit to be doomed; but
at length, with God to aid and my patron saint, it was given to me to
drive away the evil spirit that possessed me.

I lived a double life, by night and by day.  All day long was I a
pure priest of the Lord, concerned only with prayer and holy things;
but no sooner did I close my eyes in sleep than I was a young knight,
a lover of women, of horses, of hounds, a drinker, a dicer, a
blasphemer, and, when I woke at dawn, meseemed that I was fallen on
sleep, and did but dream that I was a priest.  For those years of
dreaming certain memories yet remain with me; memories of words and
things that will not down.  Ay, though I have never left the walls of
my vicarage, he who heard me would rather take me for one that had
lived in the world and left it, to die in religion, and end in the
breast of God his tumultuous days, than for a priest grown old in a
forgotten cur√©, deep in a wood, and far from the things of this earth.

Yes, I have loved as never man loved, with a wild love and a
terrible, so that I marvel my heart did not burst in twain.  Oh, the
nights of long ago!

From my earliest childhood had I felt the call to be a priest.  This
was the end of all my studies, and, till I was twenty-four, my days
were one long training.  My theological course achieved, I took the
lesser orders, and at length, at the end of Holy Week, was to be the
hour of my ordination.

I had never entered the world; my world was the college close.
Vaguely I knew that woman existed, but of woman I never thought.  My
heart was wholly pure.  Even my old and infirm mother I saw but twice
a year; of other worldly relations I had none.

I had no regrets and no hesitation in taking the irrevocable vow;
nay, I was full of an impatient joy.  Never did a young bridegroom so
eagerly count the hours of his wedding.  In my broken sleep I dreamed
of saying the Mass.  To be a priest seemed to me the noblest thing in
the world, and I would have disdained the estate of poet or of king.
To be a priest!  My ambition saw nothing higher.

All this I tell you that you may know how little I deserve that which
befell me; that you may know how inexplicable was the fascination by
which I was overcome.

The great day came, and I walked to church as if I were winged or
trod on air.  I felt an angelic beatitude, and marveled at the gloomy
and thoughtful faces of my companions, for we were many.  The night I
had passed in prayer.  I was all but entranced in ecstasy.  The
bishop, a venerable old man, was in my eyes like God the Father bowed
above His own eternity, and I seemed to see heaven open beyond the
arches of the minster.

You know the ceremony: the Benediction, the Communion in both kinds,
the anointing of the palms of the hands with consecrated oil, and
finally the celebration of the Holy Rite, offered up in company with
the bishop.  On these things I will not linger, but oh, how true is
the word of Job, that he is foolish who maketh not a covenant with
his eyes!  I chanced to raise my head and saw before me, so near that
it seemed I could touch her, though in reality she was at some
distance, and on the farther side of the railing, a young dame
royally clad, and of incomparable beauty.

It was as if scales had fallen from my eyes; and I felt like a blind
man who suddenly recovers his sight.  The bishop, so splendid a
moment ago, seemed to fade; through all the church was darkness, and
the candles paled in their sconces of gold, like stars at dawn.
Against the gloom that lovely thing shone out like a heavenly
revelation, seeming herself to be the fountain of light, and to give
it rather than receive it.  I cast down my eyes, vowing that I would
not raise them again; my attention was failing, and I scarce knew
what I did.  The moment afterward, I opened my eyes, for through my
eyelids I saw her glittering in a bright penumbra, as when one has
stared at the sun.  Ah! how beautiful she was!  The greatest
painters, when they have sought in heaven for ideal beauty, and have
brought to earth the portrait of our Lady, come never near the glory
of this vision!  Pen of poet, or palette of painter, can give no idea
of her.  She was tall, with the carriage of a goddess; her fair hair
flowed about her brows in rivers of gold.  Like a crowned queen she
stood there, with her broad white brow, and dark eyebrows; with her
eyes that had the brightness and life of the green sea, and at one
glance made or marred the destiny of a man.  They were astonishingly
clear and brilliant, shooting rays like arrows, which I could
actually see winging straight for my heart.  I know not if the flame
that lighted them came from heaven or hell, but from one or other
assuredly it came.

Angel or devil, or both; this woman was no child of Eve, the mother
of us all.  White teeth shone in her smile, little dimples came and
went with each movement of her mouth, among the roses of her cheeks.
There was a lustre as of agate on the smooth and shining skin of her
half-clad shoulders, and chains of great pearls no whiter than her
neck fell over her breast.  From time to time she lifted her head in
snake-like motion, and set the silvery ruffles of her raiment
quivering.  She wore a flame-colored velvet robe, and from the ermine
lining of her sleeves her delicate hands came and went as transparent
as the fingers of the dawn.  As I gazed on her, I felt within me as
it were the opening of gates that had ever been barred; I saw sudden
vistas of an unknown future; all life seemed altered, new thoughts
wakened in my heart.  A horrible pain took possession of me; each
minute seemed at once a moment and an age.  The ceremony went on and
on, and I was being carried far from the world, at whose gates my new
desires were beating.  I said "Yes," when I wished to say "No," when
my whole soul protested against the words my tongue was uttering.  A
hidden force seemed to drag them from me.  This it is perhaps which
makes so many young girls walk to the altar with the firm resolve to
refuse the husband who is forced on them, and this is why not one of
them does what she intends.  This is why so many poor novices take
the veil, though they are determined to tear it into shreds, rather
than pronounce the vows.  None dares cause so great a scandal before
so many observers, nor thus betray such general expectation.  The
will of all imposes itself on you; the gaze of all weighs upon you
like a cope of lead.  And again, all is so clearly arranged in
advance, so evidently irrevocable, that the intention of refusal is
crushed, and disappears.

The expression of the unknown beauty changed as the ceremony
advanced.  Tender and caressing at first, it became contemptuous and
disdainful.  With an effort that might have moved a mountain, I
strove to cry out that I would never be a priest; it was in vain; my
tongue clave to the roof of my mouth; I could not refuse even by a
sign.  Though wide awake, I seemed to be in one of those nightmares,
wherein for your life you can not utter the word on which your life
depends.  She appeared to understand the torture which I endured, and
cast on me a glance of divine pity and divine promise.  "Be mine,"
she seemed to say, "and I shall make thee happier than God and
heaven, and His angels will be jealous of thee.  Tear that shroud of
death wherein thou art swathed, for I am beauty, and I am youth, and
I am life; come to me and we shall be love.  What can Jehovah offer
thee in exchange for thy youth?  Our life will flow like a dream in
the eternity of a kiss.  Spill but the wine from that chalice, and
thou are free, and I will carry thee to the unknown isles, and thou
shalt sleep on my breast in a bed of gold beneath a canopy of silver,
for I love thee and would fain take thee from thy God, before whom so
many noble hearts pour forth the incense of their love, which dies
before it reaches the heaven where He dwells."  These words I seemed
to hear singing in the sweetest of tunes, for there was a music in
her look, and the words which her eyes sent to me resounded in my
heart as if they had been whispered in my soul.  I was ready to
foreswear God, and yet I went duly through each rite of the ceremony.
She cast me a second glance, so full of entreaty and despair, that I
felt more swords pierce my breast than stabbed the heart of our Lady
of Sorrows.

It was over, and I was a priest.

Then never did human face declare so keen a sorrow: the girl who sees
her betrothed fall dead at her side, the mother by the empty cradle
of her child, Eve at the gate of Paradise, the miser who seeks his
treasure and finds a stone, even they look less sorely smitten, less
inconsolable.

The blood left her fair face pale, white as marble she seemed; her
lovely arms fell powerless, her feet failed beneath her, and she
leaned against a pillar of the church.  For me, I staggered to the
door, with a white, wet face, breathless, with all the weight of all
the dome upon my head.  As I was crossing the threshold, a hand
seized mine, a woman's hand.  I had never felt before a woman's hand
in mine.  It was cold as the skin of a serpent, yet it burned me like
a brand.  "Miserable man, what hast thou done?" she whispered, and
was lost in the crowd.

The old bishop paused, and gazed severely at me, who was a piteous
spectacle, now red, now pale, giddy, and faint.  One of my fellows
had compassion on me, and led me home.  I could not have found the
way alone.  At the corner of a street, while the young priest's head
was turned, a black page, strangely clad, came up to me, and gave me,
as he passed, a little leathern case, with corners of wrought gold,
signing me to hide it.  I thrust it into my sleeve, and there kept it
till I was alone in my cell.  Then I opened the clasp; there were but
these words written: "Clarimonde, at the Palazzo Concini."  So little
of a worldling was I, that I had never heard of Clarimonde, despite
her fame, nay, nor knew where the Palazzo Concini might be.  I made a
myriad guesses, each wilder than the other; but, truth to tell, so I
did but see her again, I recked little whether Clarimonde were a
noble lady, or no better than one of the wicked.

This love, thus born in an hour, had struck root too deep for me to
dream of casting it from my heart.  This woman had made me utterly
her own, a glance had been enough to change me, her will had passed
upon me; I lived not for myself, but in her and for her.

Many mad things did I, kissing my hand where hers had touched it,
repeating her name for hours: Clarimonde, Clarimonde!  I had but to
close my eyes, and I saw her as distinctly as if she had been
present.  Then I murmured to myself the words that beneath the church
porch she had spoken: "Miserable man, what hast thou done?"  I felt
all the horror of that strait wherein I was, and the dead and
terrible aspect of the life that I had chosen was now revealed.  To
be a priest!  Never to love, to know youth nor sex, to turn from
beauty, to close the eyes, to crawl in the chill shade of a cloister
or a church; to see none but deathly men, to watch by the nameless
corpses of folk unknown, to wear a cassock like my own mourning for
myself, my own raiment for my coffin's pall.

Then life arose in me like a lake in flood, my blood coursed in my
veins, my youth burst forth in a moment; like the aloe, which flowers
but once in a hundred years, and breaks into blossom with a sound of
thunder!

How was I again to have sight of Clarimonde?  I had no excuse for
leaving the seminary, for I knew nobody in town, and indeed was only
waiting till I should be appointed to my parish.  I tried to remove
the bars of the window, but to descend without a ladder was
impossible.  Then, again, I could only escape by night, when I should
be lost in the labyrinth of streets.  These difficulties, which would
have been nothing to others, were enormous to a poor priest like me,
now first fallen in love, without experience, or money, or knowledge
of the world.

Ah, had I not been a priest I might have seen her every day, I might
have been her lover, her husband, I said to myself in the blindness
of my heart.  In place of being swathed in a cassock I might have
worn silk and velvet, chains of gold, a sword and feather like all
the fair young knights.  My locks would not be tonsured, but would
fall in perfumed curls about my neck.  But one hour spent before an
altar, and some gabbled words, had cut me off from the company of the
living.  With my own hand I had sealed the stone upon my tomb, and
turned the key in the lock of my prison!

I walked to the window.  The sky was heavenly blue, the trees had
clothed them in the raiment of spring, all nature smiled with mockery
in her smile.  The square was full of people coming and going: young
exquisites, young beauties, two by two, were walking in the direction
of the gardens.  Workmen sang drinking songs as they passed; on all
sides were a life, a movement, a gaiety that did but increase my
sorrow and my solitude.  A young mother, on the steps of the gate,
was playing with her child, kissing its little rosy mouth, with a
thousand of the caresses, the childlike and the divine caresses that
are the secret of mothers.  Hard by the father, with folded arms
above a happy heart, smiled sweetly as he watched them.  I could not
endure the sight.  I shut the window, and threw myself on the bed in
a horrible jealousy and hatred, so that I gnawed my fingers and my
coverlet like a starved wild beast.

How many days I lay thus I know not, but at last, as I turned in a
spasm of rage, I saw the Abb√© S√©rapion curiously considering me.  I
bowed my head in shame, and hid my face with my hands.  "Romuald, my
friend," said he, "some strange thing hath befallen thee.  Satan hath
desired to have thee, that he may sift thee like wheat; he goeth
about thee to devour thee like a raging lion.  Beware and make
thyself a breastplate of prayer, a shield of the mortifying of the
flesh.  Fight, and thou shalt overcome.  Be not afraid with any
discouragement, for the firmest hearts and the most surely guarded
have known hours like these.  Pray, fast, meditate, and the evil
spirit will pass away from thee."

Then S√©rapion told me that the priest of C---- was dead, that the
bishop had appointed me to this charge, and that I must be ready by
the morrow.  I nodded assent, and the Abb√© departed.  I opened my
missal and strove to read in it, but the lines waved confusedly, and
the volume slipped unheeded from my hands.

Next day S√©rapion came for me; two mules were waiting for us at the
gate with our slender baggage, and we mounted as well as we might.
As we traversed the streets I looked for Clarimonde, in each balcony,
at every window; but it was too early, and the city was yet asleep.
When we had passed the gates, and were climbing the height, I turned
back for a last glance at the place that was the home of Clarimonde.
The shadow of a cloud lay on the city, the red roofs and the blue
were mingled in a mist, whence rose here and there white puffs of
smoke.  By some strange optical effect, one house stood up, golden in
a ray of light, far above the roofs that were mingled in the mist.  A
league away though it was, it seemed quite close to us--all was plain
to see, turrets, balconies, parapets, the very weathercocks.

"What is that palace we see yonder in the sunlight?" said I to
S√©rapion.

He shaded his eyes with his hand, looked, and answered:

"That is the old palace which Prince Concini has given to Clarimonde
the harlot.  Therein dreadful things are done."

Even at that moment, whether it were real or a vision I know not now,
methought I saw a white and slender shape come across the terrace,
glance, and disappear.  It was Clarimonde!

Ah, did she know how in that hour, at the height of the rugged way
which led me from her, even at the crest of the path I should never
tread again, I was watching her, eager and restless, watching the
palace where she dwelt, and which a freak of light and shadow seemed
to bring near me, as if inviting me to enter and be lord of all?
Doubtless she knew it, so closely bound was her heart to mine; and
this it was which had urged her, in the raiment of the night, to
climb the palace terrace in the frosty dews of dawn.

The shadow slipped over the palace, and, anon, there was but a
motionless sea of roofs, marked merely by a billowy undulation of
forms.  S√©rapion pricked on his mule, mine also quickened, and a
winding of the road hid from me forever the city of S----, where I
was to return no more.  At the end of three days' journey through
melancholy fields, we saw the weathercock of my parish church peeping
above the trees.  Some winding lanes, bordered by cottages and
gardens, brought us to the building, which was of no great splendor.
A porch with a few moldings, and two or three pillars rudely carved
in sandstone, a tiled roof with counter-forts of the same stone as
the pillars--that was all.  To the left was the graveyard, deep in
tall grasses, with an iron cross in the centre.  The priest's house
was to the right, in the shadow of the church.  Simplicity could not
be more simple, nor cleanliness less lovely.  Some chickens were
pecking at a few grains of oats on the ground as we entered.  The
sight of a priest's frock seemed too familiar to alarm them, and they
scarcely moved to let us pass.  Then we heard a hoarse and wheezy
bark, and an old dog ran up to greet us.  He was the dog of the late
priest--dim-eyed, gray, with every sign of a dog's extreme old age.
I patted him gently, and he walked along by my side with an air of
inexpressible satisfaction.  An elderly woman, my predecessor's
housekeeper, came in her turn to greet us; and when she learned that
I meant to keep her in my service, to keep the dog and the chickens,
with all the furniture that her master had left her at his
death--above all, when the Abb√© S√©rapion paid what she asked on the
spot--her joy knew no bounds.

When I had been duly installed, S√©rapion returned to the college, and
I was left alone.  Unsupported, uncomforted as I was, the thought of
Clarimonde again beset me, nor could I drive her memory away for all
my efforts.  One evening, as I walked among the box-lined paths of my
little garden, I fancied that I saw among the trees the form of a
woman, who followed all my movements, and whose green eyes glistened
through the leaves.  Green as the sea shone her eyes, but it was no
more than a vision, for when I crossed to the other side of the alley
nothing did I find but the print of a little foot on the sand--a foot
like the foot of a child.  Now the garden was girt with high walls,
and, for all my search, I could find no living thing within them.  I
have never been able to explain this incident, which, after all, was
nothing to the strange adventures that were to follow.

Thus did I live for a whole year, fulfilling every duty of the
priesthood--preaching, praying, fasting, visiting the sick, denying
myself necessaries that I might give to the poor.  But within me all
was dry and barren--the fountains of grace were sealed.  I knew not
the happiness which goes with the consciousness of a holy mission
fulfilled.  My heart was otherwhere; the words of Clarimonde dwelt on
my lips like the ballad burden a man repeats against his will.  Oh,
my brother, consider this!  For the lifting up of mine eyes to behold
a woman have I been harried these many years, and my life hath been
troubled forever.

I shall not hold you longer with the story of these defeats and these
victories and the fresh defeats of my soul; let me come to the
beginning of the new life.

One night there was a violent knocking at my gate.  The old
housekeeper went to open it, and the appearance of a man richly clad
in an outlandish fashion, tawny of hue, armed with a long dagger,
stood before her in the light of her lantern.  She was terrified, but
he soothed her, saying that he needs must see me instantly concerning
a matter of my ministry.  Barbara brought him upstairs to the room
where I was about going to bed.  There the man told me that his
mistress, a lady of high degree, was on the point of death, and
desired to see a priest.  I answered that I was ready to follow him,
and taking with me such matters as are needful for extreme unction, I
went down hastily.  At the door were two horses, black as night,
their breath rising in white clouds of vapor.  The man held my
stirrup while I mounted; then he laid one hand on the pommel and
vaulted on the other horse.  Gripping his beast with his knees, he
gave him his head, and we started with the speed of an arrow, my
horse keeping pace with his own.  We seemed in running to devour the
way; the earth flitted gray beneath us, the black trees fled in the
darkness like an army in rout.  A forest we crossed, so gloomy and so
frozen cold that I felt in all my veins a shudder of superstitious
dread.  The sparks struck from the flints by our coursers' feet
followed after us like a trail of fire, and whoever saw us must have
deemed us two ghosts riding the nightmare.  Will-o'-the-wisps
glittered across our path, the night birds clamored in the forest
deeps, and now and again shone out the burning eyes of wild-cats.

The manes of the horses tossed more wildly on the wind, the sweat ran
down their sides, their breath came thick and loud.  But whenever
they slackened, the groom called on them with a cry like nothing that
ever came from a human throat, and again they ran their furious
course.  At last the tempest of their flight reached its goal;
suddenly there stood before us a great dark mass, with shining points
of flame.  Our horses' hoofs clattered louder on a drawbridge, and we
thundered through the dark depths of a vaulted entrance which gaped
between two monstrous towers.  Within the castle all was
confusion--servants with burning torches ran hither and thither
through the courts; on the staircases lights rose and fell.  I beheld
a medley of vast buildings, columns, arches, parapet and balcony--a
bewildering world of royal or of fairy palaces.  The negro page who
had given me the tablets of Clarimonde, and whom I recognized at a
glance, helped me to alight.  A seneschal in black velvet, with a
golden chain about his neck, and an ivory wand in his hand, came
forward to meet me, great tears rolling down his cheeks to his snowy
beard.

"Too late," he said; "too late, sir priest!  But if thou hast not
come in time to save the soul, watch, I pray thee, with the unhappy
body of the dead."

He took me by the arm; he led me to the hall, where the corpse was
lying, and I wept as bitterly as he, deeming that the dead was
Clarimonde, the well and wildly loved.  There stood a prie-dieu by
the bed; a blue flame flickering from a cup of bronze cast all about
the chamber a doubtful light, and here and there set the shadows
fluttering.  In a chiseled vase on the table was one white rose
faded, a single petal clinging to the stem; the rest had fallen like
fragrant tears and lay beside the vase.  A broken mask, a fan,
masquerading gear of every kind were huddled on the chairs, and
showed that death had come, unlooked for and unheralded, to that
splendid house.  Not daring to cast mine eyes upon the bed, I
kneeled, and fervently began to repeat the Psalms, thanking God that
between this woman and me He had set the tomb, so that now her name
might come like a thing enskied and sainted in my prayers.

By degrees this ardor slackened, and I fell a-dreaming.  This
chamber, after all, had none of the air of a chamber of death.  In
place of the fetid, corpse-laden atmosphere that I was wont to
breathe in these vigils, there floated gently through the warmth a
vapor of Orient essences, a perfume of women and of love.  The pale
glimmer of the lamp seemed rather the twilight of pleasure than the
yellow burning of the taper that watches by the dead.  I began to
think of the rare hazard that brought me to Clarimonde in the moment
when I had lost her forever, and a sigh came from my breast.  Then
meseemed that one answered with a sigh behind me, and I turned
unconsciously.  'Twas but an echo, but, as I turned, mine eyes fell
on that which they had shunned--the bed where Clarimonde lay in
state.  The flowered and crimson curtains, bound up with loops of
gold, left the dead woman plain to view, lying at her length, with
hands folded on her breast.  She was covered with a linen veil, very
white and glistening, the more by reason of the dark purple hangings,
and so fine was the shroud that her fair body shone through it, with
those beautiful soft waving lines, as of the swan's neck, that not
even death could harden.  Fair she was as a statue of alabaster
carved by some skilled man for the tomb of a queen; fair as a young
maid asleep beneath new-fallen snow.

I could endure no longer.  The air as of a bower of love, the scent
of the faded rose intoxicated me, and I strode through the chamber,
stopping at each turn to gaze at the beautiful dead beneath the
transparent shroud.  Strange thoughts haunted my brain.  I fancied
that she was not really gone, that it was but a device to draw me
within her castle gates, and to tell me all her love.

Nay, one moment methought I saw her foot stir beneath its white
swathings, and break the stiff lines of the shroud.

"Is she really Clarimonde?" I asked myself presently.  "What proof
have I?  The black page may have entered the household of some other
lady.  Mad must I be thus to disquiet myself."

But the beating of my own heart answered me, "It is she!  It is she!"

I drew near the bed, and looked with fresh attention at that which
thus perplexed me.  Shall I confess it?  The perfection of her
beauty, though shadowed and sanctified by death, troubled my heart,
and that long rest of hers was wondrous like a living woman's sleep.
I forgot that I had come there to watch by a corpse, and I dreamed
that I was a young bridegroom entering the chamber of the veiled,
half-hidden bride.  Broken with sorrow, wild with joy, shuddering
with dread and desire, I stooped toward the dead and raised a corner
of the sheet.  Gently I raised it, holding my breath as though I
feared to waken her.  My blood coursed so vehemently that I heard it
rushing and surging through the veins of my temples.  My brow was
dank with drops of sweat, as if I had lifted no film of linen, but a
weighty gravestone of marble.

There lay Clarimonde, even as I had seen her on the day of mine
ordination; even so delightful was she, and death in Clarimonde
seemed but a wilful charm.  The pallor of her cheeks, her dead lips
fading rose, her long downcast eyelids, with their brown lashes,
breaking the marble of her cheek, all gave her an air of melancholy,
and of purity, of pensive patience that had an inexpressible winning
magic.  Her long loose hair, the small blue flowers yet scattered
through it, pillowed her head, and veiled the splendor of her
shoulders.  Her fair hands, clear and pure as the consecrated wafer,
were crossed in an attitude of holy rest and silent prayer, that
suffered not the exquisite roundness and ivory polish of her pearled
arms to prove, even in death, too triumphant a lure of men.

Long did I wait and watch her silently, and still the more I gazed,
the less I could deem that life had left forever her beautiful body.
I knew not if it were an illusion, or a reflection from the lamp, but
it was as if the blood began to flow again beneath that dead white of
her flesh, and yet she lay eternally, immovably still.  I touched her
arm; it was cold, but no colder than her hand had been on the day
when it met mine beneath the church porch.  I fell into my old
attitude, stooping my face above her face, while down upon her rained
the warm dew of my tears.  Oh, bitterness of impotence and of
despair; oh, wild agony of that death watch!

The night crept on, and as I felt that the eternal separation drew
near, I could not deny myself the sad last delight of one kiss on the
dead lips that held all my love.

Oh, miracle!  A light breath mingled with my breath, and the mouth of
Clarimonde answered to the touch of mine!  Her eyes opened, and
softly shone.  She sighed, she uncrossed her arms, and, folding them
about my neck in a ravished ecstasy:

"Ah, Romuald, it is thou!" she said in a voice as sweet and
languishing as the last tremblings of a lyre.  "Ah, Romuald, what
makest thou here?  So long have I waited for thee that I am dead.
Yet now we are betrothed, now I may see thee, and visit thee.
Farewell, Romuald, farewell!  I love thee.  It is all that I had to
tell thee, and I give thee again that life which thou gavest me with
thy kiss.  Soon shall we meet again."

Her head sank down, but still her arms clung to me as if they would
hold me forever.  A wild gust of wind burst open the window and broke
into the room.  The last leaf of the white rose fluttered like a
bird's wing on the stem, and then fell and flew through the open
casement, bearing with it the soul of Clarimonde.

The lamp went out, and I fell fainting on the breast of the beautiful
corpse.

When I came to myself I was lying on my own bed in the little chamber
of the priest's house; my hand had slipped from beneath the coverlet,
the old dog was licking it.  Barbara hobbled and trembled about the
room, opening and shutting drawers, and shaking powders into glasses.
The old woman gave a cry of delight when she saw me open my eyes.
The dog yelped and wagged his tail, but I was too weak to utter a
word or make the slightest movement.  Later, I learned that for three
days I had lain thus, with no sign of life but a scarce perceptible
breathing.  These three days do not count in my life; I know not
where my spirit went wandering all that time, whereof I keep not the
slightest memory.  Barbara told me that the same bronzed man who had
come for me at night brought me back in a closed litter next morning,
and instantly went his way.  So soon as I could recall my thoughts, I
reviewed each incident of that fatal night.  At first I deemed that I
had been duped by art magic, but presently actual, palpable
circumstances destroyed that belief.  I could not suppose that I had
been dreaming, for Barbara, no less than myself, had seen the man
with the two coal-black steeds, and she described them accurately.
Yet no one knew of any castle in the neighborhood at all like that in
which I had found Clarimonde again.

One morning S√©rapion entered my room; he had come with all haste in
answer to Barbara's message about my illness.  Though this declared
his affection for me, none the more did his visit give me pleasure.
There was something inquisitive and piercing to my mind in the very
glance of S√©rapion, and I felt like a criminal in his presence.  He
it was who first discovered my secret disquiet, and I bore him a
grudge for being so clear-sighted.

While he was asking about my health, in accents of honeyed hypocrisy,
his eyes, as yellow as a lion's, were sounding the depths of my soul.
Presently--"The famous harlot Clarimonde is dead," says he, in a
piercing tone, "dead at the close of an eight days' revel.  It was a
feast of Belshazzar or of Cleopatra.  Good God, what an age is ours!
The guests were served by dusky slaves who spoke no tongue known
among men, and who seemed like spirits from the pit.  The livery of
the least of them might have beseemed an emperor on a coronation day.
Wild tales are told of this same Clarimonde, and all her loves have
perished miserably or by violence.  They say she was a ghost, a
female vampire, but I believe she was the devil himself."

He paused, watching me, who could not master a sudden movement at the
name of Clarimonde.

"Satan's claw is long," said S√©rapion, with a stern glance, "and
tombs ere now have given up their dead.  Threefold should be the seal
upon the grave of Clarimonde, for this is not, men say, the first
time she hath died.  God be with thee, Romuald!"

So speaking, S√©rapion departed with slow steps, and I saw him no more
as at that time.

Time passed and I was well again.  Nay, I deemed that the fears of
S√©rapion and my own terrors were too great, till, one night, I
dreamed a dream.

Scarce had I tasted the first drops of the cup of sleep when I heard
the curtains of my bed open and the rings ring.  I raised myself
suddenly on my arm and saw the shadow of a woman standing by me.

Straightway I knew her for Clarimonde.

She held in her hand a little lamp, such as are placed in tombs, and
the light touched her slim fingers to a rosy hue, that faded away in
the milk-white of her arms.  She was clad with naught on but the
linen shroud that veiled her when she lay in state; the folds were
clasped about her breast, as it were in pudency, by a hand all too
small.  So white she was that her shroud and her body were blended in
the pallid glow of the lamp.

Swathed thus in the fine tissue that betrayed every line of her
figure, she seemed a marble image of some lady at the bath rather
than a living woman.  Dead or living, statue or woman, spirit or
flesh, her beauty was the same; only the glitter of her dull
sea-green eyes was dulled--only the mouth, so red of old, wore but a
tender tint of rose, like the white rose of her cheeks.  The little
blue flowers that I had seen in her hair were sere now, and all but
bloomless; yet so winning was she, so winning that, despite the
strangeness of the adventure and her inexplicable invasion of my
chamber, I was not afraid for one moment.

She placed the lamp on the table, and sat down by my bed-foot.  Then,
in those soft and silver accents which I never heard from any lips
but hers--"Long have I made thee wait for me," she said, "and thou
must have deemed that I had forgotten thee quite.  But lo!  I come
from far, very far--even from that land whence no traveler has
returned.  There is no sunlight nor moon in the country whence I
wander, only shadow and space.  There the foot finds no rest, nor the
wandering wing any way; yet here am I; behold me, for Love can
conquer Death.  Ah, what sad faces and terrible eyes have I seen in
my voyaging, and in what labor hath my soul been to find my body and
to make her home therein again!  How hard to lift was the stone that
they had laid on me for a covering!  Lo, my hands are sorely wounded
in that toil!  Kiss them, my love, and heal them."  And she laid her
chill palms, on my mouth, that I kissed many times, she smiling on me
with an inexpressible sweetness of delight.

To my shame be it spoken, I had wholly forgotten the counsels of the
Abb√© S√©rapion, and the sacred character of my ministry.  I fell
unresisting at the first attack.  Nay, I did not even try to bid the
tempter avaunt, but succumbed without a struggle before the sweet
freshness of Clarimonde's fair body.  Poor child! for all that is
come and gone, I can scarce believe that she was indeed a devil;
surely there was naught of the devil in her aspect.  Never hath Satan
better concealed his claws and his horns!

She was crouching on the side of my bed, her heels drawn up beneath
her in an attitude of careless and provoking grace.  Once and again
she would pass her little hands among my locks, and curl them, as if
to try what style best suited my face.  It is worth noting that I
felt no astonishment at an adventure so marvelous--nay, as in a dream
the strangest events fail to surprise us, even so the whole encounter
seemed to me perfectly natural.

"I loved thee long before I saw thee, Romuald, my love, and I sought
for thee everywhere.  Thou wert my dream, and I beheld thee in the
church at that fatal hour.  'It is he,' I whispered to myself, and
cast on thee a glance fulfilled of all the love wherewith I had
loved, and did love, and shall love thee; a glance that would have
ruined the soul of a cardinal or brought a king with all his court to
my feet.

"But thou wert not moved, and before my love thou didst place the
love of God.

"Ah, 'tis of God that I am jealous--God whom thou hast loved and
lovest more than me.

"Miserable woman that I am!  Never shall I have all thy heart for
myself alone--for me, whom thou didst awaken with one kiss; for me,
Clarimonde, the dead; for me, who for thy sake have broken the
portals of the grave, and am come to offer to thee a life that hath
been taken up again for this one end to make thee happy."

So she spoke; and every word was broken in on by maddening caresses,
till my brain swam, and I feared not to console her by this awful
blasphemy, namely--_That my love of her passed my love of God!_

Then the fire of her eyes was rekindled, and they blazed as it had
been the chrysoprase stone.

"Verily thou lovest me with a love like thy love of God," she cried,
making her fair arms a girdle for my body.  "Then thou shalt come
with me, and whithersoever I go wilt thou follow.  Thou wilt leave
thine ugly black robes, thou wilt be of all knights the proudest and
the most envied.  The acknowledged lover of Clarimonde shalt thou be,
of her who refused a Pope!  Ah, happy life, oh, golden days that
shall be ours!  When do we mount and ride, _mon gentilhomme_?"

"To-morrow," I cried in my madness.

"To-morrow," she answered, "I shall have time to change this robe of
mine that is somewhat scant, nor fit for voyaging.  Also must I speak
with my retainers, that think me dead in good earnest, and lament me,
as well they may.  Money, carriages, change of raiment, all shall be
ready for thee; at this hour to-morrow will I seek thee.  Good-by,
sweetheart."

She touched my brow with her lips, the lamp faded into darkness, the
curtains closed, a sleep like lead came down on me, sleep without a
dream.

I wakened late, troubled by the memory of my dream, which at length I
made myself believe was but a vision of the night.  Yet it was not
without dread that I sought rest again, praying Heaven to guard the
purity of my slumber.

Anon I fell again into a deep sleep, and my dream began again.  The
curtains opened, and there stood Clarimonde, not pale in her pale
shroud, nor with the violets of death upon her cheek; but gay,
bright, splendid, in a traveling robe of green velvet with trappings
of gold, and kilted up on one side to show a satin undercoat.  Her
fair, curled locks fell in great masses from under a large black
beaver hat, with strange white plumes; in her hand she held a little
riding-whip, topped with a golden whistle.  With this she touched me
gently, saying:

"Awake, fair sleeper!  Is it thus you prepare for your voyage?  I had
thought to find you alert.  Rise, quickly; we have no time to lose!"

I leaped out of bed.

"Come, dress, and let us be gone," she said, showing me a packet she
had brought.  "Our horses are fretting and champing at the gate.  We
should be ten leagues from here."

I arrayed myself in haste, while she instructed me, handed me the
various articles of a knight's attire, and laughed at my clumsiness.
She dressed my hair, and when all was done, gave me a little Venice
pocket-mirror in a silver frame, crying:

"What think you of yourself now?  Will you take me for your valet de
chambre?"

I did not know my own face in the glass, and was no more like myself
than a statue is like the uncut stone.  I was beautiful, and I was
vain of the change.  The gold embroidered gallant attire made me
another man, and I marveled at the magic of a few ells of cloth,
fashioned to certain device.  The character of my clothes became my
own, and in ten minutes I was sufficiently conceited.

Clarimonde watched me with a kind of maternal fondness as I walked up
and down the room, proving my new raiment as it were; then:

"Come," she cried; "enough of this child's play!  Up and away, my
Romuald!  We have far to go; we shall never arrive."

She took my hand and led me forth.  The gates opened at her touch;
the dog did not waken as we passed.

At the gate we found the groom with three horses like those he had
led before: Tennets of Spain, the children of the wind.  Swift as the
wind they sped; and the moon that had risen to light us at our going,
spun down the sky behind us like a wheel broken loose from the axle;
we seemed to see her on our right, leaping from tree to tree as she
strove to follow our course.  Presently we came on a plain, where a
carriage with four horses waited for us; and the postilion drove them
to a mad gallop.  My arm was round the waist of Clarimonde, her head
lay on my shoulder, her breast touched my arm.  Never had I known
such delight.  All that I had been was forgotten, like the months
before birth, so great was the power of the devil over my heart.

From that date mine became a double life; within me were two men that
knew each other not--the priest who dreamed that by night he was a
noble, the noble who dreamed that by night he was a priest.  I could
not divide dreams from waking, nor tell where truth ended and
illusion began.  Two spirals, blended but touching not, might be a
parable of my confused existence.  Yet, strange as it was, I believe
I never was insane.  The experience of either life dwells distinct
and separate in my memory.  Only there was this inexplicable
fact--the feeling of one personality existed in both these two
different men.  Of this I have never found an explanation, whether I
was for the moment the cur√© of the village of ----, or whether I was
Signor Romualdo, the avowed lover of Clarimonde.

Certain it is that I was, or believed myself to be, in Venice--in a
great palace on the Grand Canal, full of frescoes, statues, and rich
in two Titians of his best period--a palace fit for a king.  We had
each our gondola, our liveried men, our music, our poet, for
Clarimonde loved life in the great style, and in her nature was a
touch of Cleopatra.  Custom could not stale her infinite variety; to
love her was to love a score of mistresses, and you were faithless to
her with herself, so strangely she could wear the beauty of any woman
that caught your fancy.  She returned my love a hundred-fold.  She
scorned the gifts of young patricians and of the elders of the
Council of Ten.  She refused the hand of a Foscari.  Gold enough she
had, she desired only love; a young fresh love herself had wakened--a
love that found in her its first mistress and its last.

As for me, in the midst of a life of the wildest pleasure, I should
have been happy but for the nightly horror of the dream wherein I was
a cur√©, fasting and mortifying myself in penance for the sins of the
day.  Custom made my life with her familiar, and it was rarely that I
remembered (and that never with fear) the words of the Abb√© S√©rapion.

For some time Clarimonde had not been herself, her health failing,
her complexion growing paler day by day.  The physicians were of no
avail, and she grew cold and dead as on the wondrous night in the
nameless castle.  Sadly she smiled on my distress, with the fatal
smile of those who know that their death is near.  One morning I sat
on her bed, breakfasting at a small table hard by; as it chanced in
cutting a fruit I gashed my finger deeply; the blood came in purple
streams; and spurted up on Clarimonde.  Her eyes brightened, her face
took on a savage joy and greed such as I had never seen.  She leaped
from the bed like a cat, seized my wounded hand, and sucked the blood
with unspeakable pleasure, slowly, gently like a connoisseur tasting
some rare wine.

In her half-closed eyes the round pupil grew long in shape.  Again
and again she stopped to kiss my hand, and then pressed her lips once
more on the wound, to squeeze out the red drops.

When she saw that the blood was stanched, she rose; her eyes
brilliant and humid, her face as rosy as a dawn of May, her hand warm
and moist; in short, more lovely than of old, and in perfect health.

"I shall not die!  I shall not die!" she exclaimed, wild with
delight, as she embraced me.  "I shall yet love thee long; for my
life is in thine, and all that is in me comes from thee.  Some drops
of thy rich and noble blood, more precious than all the elixirs in
the world, have given me back my life."

This event, and the strange doubts it inspired, haunted me long.
When the night and sleep brought me back to my priest's home, I
beheld S√©rapion, more anxious than ever, more careful and troubled.
He gazed on me steadfastly, and said:

"Not content with losing thy soul, thou art also desirous of ruining
thy body.  Unhappy young man, in what a net hast thou fallen!"

The tone of his voice struck cold on me; but a thousand new cares
made me forget his words.  Yet, one night I saw in a mirror that
Clarimonde was pouring a powder into the spiced wine-cup she mingled
after supper.  I took the cup, pretending to drink, but really
casting the potion away beneath the table.  Then I went to bed,
intent on watching and seeing what should come to pass.  Nor did I
wait long.  Clarimonde entered, cast off her night attire, and lay
down by my side.  When she was assured that I slept, she uncovered my
arm, drew a golden pin from her hair, and then fell a-murmuring thus:

"One drop, one little crimson drop, one ruby on the tip of my needle!
Since thou lovest me yet, I must not die.  Sleep, my god, my child,
my all; I shall not harm thee; of thy life I will but take what is
needful for mine.  Alas! poor love; alas! fair purple blood that I
must drink!  Ah, fair arm, so round, so white, never will I dare to
prick that pretty violet vein."

So speaking, she wept, and the tears fell hot on my arm.  At length
she came to a resolve, pricked me with the needle, and sucked the
blood that flowed.  But a few drops did she taste, for fear of
exhausting me, then she anointed the tiny wound, and fastened a
little bandage about my arm.

I could no longer doubt it, S√©rapion had spoken sooth.  Yet must I
needs love Clarimonde, and would willingly have given her all the
blood in my veins that then were rich enough.  Nor was I afraid, the
woman in her was more than surety for the vampire.  I could have
pricked my own arm and said, "Drink; let my love become part of thy
being with my blood."  I never spoke a word of the narcotic that she
had poured out for me, never a word of the needle; we lived together
in perfect union of hearts.

It was my scruples as a priest that disquieted me.  How could I touch
the Host with hands polluted in such debauches, real or dreamed of?
At night I struggled against sleep, holding mine eyelids open,
standing erect against walls; but mine eyes were filled with the sand
of sleep, and the wave carried me even where it would, down to the
siren shores.

S√©rapion reproached me often.  One day he came and said: "To drive
away the devil that possesses thee there is but one art; great ills
demand harsh remedies.  I know where Clarimonde is buried; we must
unearth her, and the sight of the worms and the dust of death will
make thee thyself again."

So weary was I of my double life, so eager to know whether the priest
or the noble was the true man, which the dream, that I accepted his
plan, being determined to slay one or the other of the beings that
dwelt within me; ay, or to slay them both, for such a life as mine
could not endure.

The Abb√© S√©rapion took a lantern, a pick, a crowbar, and at midnight
we set out for the graveyard.  After throwing the light of the
lantern on several tombs, we reached a stone half-hidden by tall
weeds, and covered with ivy, moss, and lichen.  Thereon we read these
words graven:

  ICI GIT CLARIMONDE
  QUI PUT DE SON VIVANTE
  LA PLUS BELLE DU MONDE


"'Tis here!" said S√©rapion, who, laying down his lantern, thrust the
crowbar in a cleft of the stone, and began to raise it.  Slowly it
gave place, and he set to work with the pick-ax.  For me, I watched
him dark and silent as the night, while his face, when he raised it,
ran with sweat, and his laboring breath came like the death-rattle in
his throat.  Methought the deed was a sacrilege, and I would fain
have seen the lightning leap from the cloud, and strike S√©rapion to
ashes.

The owls of the graveyard, attracted by the light, flocked and
flapped about the lantern with their wings; their hooting sounded
wofully; the foxes barked their answer far away; a thousand evil
sounds broke from the stillness.

At length the pick of S√©rapion smote the coffin-lid; the four planks
answered sullenly, as the void of nothingness replied to the touch.
S√©rapion raised the coffin-lid, and there I saw Clarimonde, pale as
marble, her hands joined, the long white shroud flowing unbroken to
her feet.

On her pale mouth shone one rosy drop, and S√©rapion, breaking forth
in fury, cried:

"Ah, there thou liest, devil, harlot, vampire, thou that drainest the
blood of men!"

With this he sprinkled holy water over my lady, whose fair body
straightway crumbled into earth, a dreadful mingling of dust and the
ashes of bones half-burned.

"There lies thy leman, Sir Romuald," he said; "go now and dally at
the Lido with thy beauty."

I bowed my head; within me all was ruin.  Back to my poor priest's
house I went; and Romuald, the lover of Clarimonde, said farewell to
the priest, with whom so long and so strangely he had companioned.

But, next night, I saw Clarimonde.

"Wretched man that thou art," she cried, as of old under the church
porch, "what hast thou done?  Why hast thou hearkened to that foolish
priest?  Wert thou not happy, or what ill had I done thee that thou
must violate my tomb, and lay bare the wretchedness of the grave?
Henceforth is the link between our souls and bodies broken.
Farewell!  Thou shalt desire me."

Then she fled away into air, like smoke, and I saw her no more.

Alas! it was truth she spoke; more than once have I sorrowed for
her--nay, I long for her still.  Dearly purchased hath my salvation
been, and the love of God hath not been too much to replace the love
of her.

Behold, brother, all the story of my youth.

Let not thine eyes look ever upon a woman; walk always with glance
downcast; for, be ye chaste and be ye cold as ye may, one minute may
damn you to all eternity.


(_Translation by Andrew Lang._)




THE RED ROOM

BY H. G. WELLS

_Herbert George Wells (born 1866), on his graduation in 1888 from the
Royal College of Science, took up the serious side of science as a
career, publishing in 1892-93 a textbook on biology.  An editorial
connection (with "The Saturday Review" in 1894-96) turned his
attention to the literary possibilities of his favorite study, and in
1895 he began a series of novels in which by an extraordinary
prescience of imagination he developed the suggestions of modern
science into marvelous embodiments of newly discovered principles and
powers which are shown to result in profound changes in both the
social and individual character of man._



THE RED ROOM

By H. G. WELLS

"I can assure you," said I, "that it will take a very tangible ghost
to frighten me."  And I stood up before the fire with my glass in my
hand.

"It is your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm, and
glanced at me askance.

"Eight-and-twenty years," said I, "I have lived, and never a ghost
have I seen as yet."

The old woman sat staring hard into the fire, her pale eyes wide
open.  "Ay," she broke in, "and eight-and-twenty years you have
lived, and never seen the likes of this house, I reckon.  There's a
many things to see, when one's still but eight-and-twenty."  She
swayed her head slowly from side to side.  "A many things to see and
sorrow for."

I half suspected these old people were trying to enhance the spectral
terrors of their house by this droning insistence.  I put down my
empty glass on the table, and, looking about the room, caught a
glimpse of myself, abbreviated and broadened to an impossible
sturdiness, in the queer old mirror beside the china cupboard.
"Well," I said, "if I see anything to-night, I shall be so much the
wiser.  For I come to the business with an open mind."

"It's your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm once
more.

I heard the faint sound of a stick and a shambling step on the flags
in the passage outside.  The door creaked on its hinges as a second
old man entered, more bent, more wrinkled, more aged even than the
first.  He supported himself by the help of a crutch, his eyes were
covered by a shade, and his lower lip, half averted, hung pale and
pink from his decaying yellow teeth.  He made straight for an
armchair on the opposite side of the table, sat down clumsily, and
began to cough.  The man with the withered hand gave the new-comer a
short glance of positive dislike; the old woman took no notice of his
arrival, but remained with her eyes fixed steadily on the fire.

"I said--it's your own choosing," said the man with the withered
hand, when the coughing had ceased for a while.

"It's my own choosing," I answered.

The man with the shade became aware of my presence for the first
time, and threw his head back for a moment, and sidewise, to see me.
I caught a momentary glimpse of his eyes, small and bright and
inflamed.  Then he began to cough and splutter again.

"Why don't you drink?" said the man with the withered arm, pushing
the beer toward him.  The man with the shade poured out a glassful
with a shaking hand, that splashed half as much again on the deal
table.  A monstrous shadow of him crouched upon the wall, and mocked
his action as he poured and drank.  I must confess I had scarcely
expected these grotesque custodians.  There is, to my mind, something
inhuman in senility, something crouching and atavistic; the human
qualities seem to drop from old people insensibly day by day.  The
three of them made me feel uncomfortable with their gaunt silences,
their bent carriage, their evident unfriendliness to me and to one
another.  And that night, perhaps, I was in the mood for
uncomfortable impressions.  I resolved to get away from their vague
foreshadowings of the evil things upstairs.

"If," said I, "you will show me to this haunted room of yours, I will
make myself comfortable there."

The old man with the cough jerked his head back so suddenly that it
startled me, and shot another glance of his red eyes at me from out
of the darkness under the shade, but no one answered me.  I waited a
minute, glancing from one to the other.  The old woman stared like a
dead body, glaring into the fire with lack-lustre eyes.

"If," I said, a little louder, "if you will show me to this haunted
room of yours, I will relieve you from the task of entertaining me."

"There's a candle on the slab outside the door," said the man with
the withered hand, looking at my feet as he addressed me.  "But if
you go to the Red Room to-night--"

"This night of all nights!" said the old woman, softly.

"--You go alone."

"Very well," I answered, shortly, "and which way do I go?"

"You go along the passage for a bit," said he, nodding his head on
his shoulder at the door, "until you come to a spiral staircase; and
on the second landing is a door covered with green baize.  Go through
that, and down the long corridor to the end, and the Red Room is on
your left up the steps."

"Have I got that right?" I said, and repeated his directions.

He corrected me in one particular.

"And you are really going?" said the man with the shade, looking at
me again for the third time with that queer, unnatural tilting of the
face.

"This night of all nights!" whispered the old woman.

"It is what I came for," I said, and moved toward the door.  As I did
so, the old man with the shade rose and staggered round the table, so
as to be closer to the others and to the fire.  At the door I turned
and looked at them, and saw they were all close together, dark
against the firelight, staring at me over their shoulders, with an
intent expression on their ancient faces.

"Good-night," I said, setting the door open.

"It's your own choosing," said the man with the withered arm.

I left the door wide open until the candle was well alight, and then
I shut them in, and walked down the chilly, echoing passage.

I must confess that the oddness of these three old pensioners in
whose charge her ladyship had left the castle, and the deep-toned,
old-fashioned furniture of the housekeeper's room, in which they
foregathered, had affected me curiously in spite of my effort to keep
myself at a matter-of-fact phase.  They seemed to belong to another
age, an older age, an age when things spiritual were indeed to be
feared, when common sense was uncommon, an age when omens and witches
were credible, and ghosts beyond denying.  Their very existence,
thought I, is spectral; the cut of their clothing, fashions born in
dead brains; the ornaments and conveniences in the room about them
even are ghostly--the thoughts of vanished men, which still haunt
rather than participate in the world of to-day.  And the passage I
was in, long and shadowy, with a film of moisture glistening on the
wall, was as gaunt and cold as a thing that is dead and rigid.  But
with an effort I sent such thoughts to the right-about.  The long,
drafty subterranean passage was chilly and dusty, and my candle
flared and made the shadows cower and quiver.  The echoes rang up and
down the spiral staircase, and a shadow came sweeping up after me,
and another fled before me into the darkness overhead.  I came to the
wide landing and stopped there for a moment listening to a rustling
that I fancied I heard creeping behind me, and then, satisfied of the
absolute silence, pushed open the unwilling baize-covered door and
stood in the silent corridor.

The effect was scarcely what I expected, for the moonlight, coming in
by the great window on the grand staircase, picked out everything in
vivid black shadow or reticulated silvery illumination.  Everything
seemed in its proper position; the house might have been deserted on
the yesterday instead of twelve months ago.  There were candles in
the sockets of the sconces, and whatever dust had gathered on the
carpets or upon the polished flooring was distributed so evenly as to
be invisible in my candlelight.  A waiting stillness was over
everything.  I was about to advance, and stopped abruptly.  A bronze
group stood upon the landing hidden from me by a corner of the wall;
but its shadow fell with marvelous distinctness upon the white
paneling, and gave me the impression of some one crouching to waylay
me.  The thing jumped upon my attention suddenly.  I stood rigid for
half a moment, perhaps.  Then, with my hand in the pocket that held
the revolver, I advanced, only to discover a Ganymede and Eagle,
glistening in the moonlight.  That incident for a time restored my
nerve, and a dim porcelain Chinaman on a buhl table, whose head
rocked as I passed, scarcely startled me.

The door of the Red Room and the steps up to it were in a shadowy
corner.  I moved my candle from side to side in order to see clearly
the nature of the recess in which I stood, before opening the door.
Here it was, thought I, that my predecessor was found, and the memory
of that story gave me a sudden twinge of apprehension.  I glanced
over my shoulder at the black Ganymede in the moonlight, and opened
the door of the Red Room rather hastily, with my face half turned to
the pallid silence of the corridor.

I entered, closed the door behind me at once, turned the key I found
in the lock within, and stood with the candle held aloft surveying
the scene of my vigil, the great Red Room of Lorraine Castle, in
which the young Duke had died; or rather in which he had begun his
dying, for he had opened the door and fallen headlong down the steps
I had just ascended.  That had been the end of his vigil, of his
gallant attempt to conquer the ghostly tradition of the place, and
never, I thought, had apoplexy better served the ends of
superstition.  There were other and older stories that clung to the
room, back to the half-incredible beginning of it all, the tale of a
timid wife and the tragic end that came to her husband's jest of
frightening her.  And looking round that huge shadowy room with its
black window bays, its recesses and alcoves, its dusty brown-red
hangings and dark gigantic furniture, one could well understand the
legends that had sprouted in its black corners, its germinating
darknesses.  My candle was a little tongue of light in the vastness
of the chamber; its rays failed to pierce to the opposite end of the
room, and left an ocean of dull red mystery and suggestion, sentinel
shadows and watching darknesses beyond its island of light.  And the
stillness of desolation brooded over it all.

I must confess some impalpable quality of that ancient room disturbed
me.  I tried to fight the feeling down.  I resolved to make a
systematic examination of the place, and so, by leaving nothing to
the imagination, dispel the fanciful suggestions of the obscurity
before they obtained a hold upon me.  After satisfying myself of the
fastening of the door, I began to walk round the room, peering round
each article of furniture, tucking up the valances of the bed and
opening its curtains wide.  In one place there was a distinct echo to
my footsteps, the noises I made seemed so little that they enhanced
rather than broke the silence of the place.  I pulled up the blinds
and examined the fastenings of the several windows.  Attracted by the
fall of a particle of dust, I leaned forward and looked up the
blackness of the wide chimney.  Then, trying to preserve my
scientific attitude of mind, I walked round and began tapping the oak
paneling for any secret opening, but I desisted before reaching the
alcove.  I saw my face in a mirror--white.

There were two big mirrors in the room, each with a pair of sconces
bearing candles, and on the mantelshelf, too, were candles in china
candlesticks.  All these I lit one after the other.  The fire was
laid--an unexpected consideration from the old housekeeper--and I lit
it, to keep down any disposition to shiver, and when it was burning
well I stood round with my back to it and regarded the room again.  I
had pulled up a chintz-covered armchair and a table to form a kind of
barricade before me.  On this lay my revolver, ready to hand.  My
precise examination had done me a little good, but I still found the
remoter darkness of the place and its perfect stillness too
stimulating for the imagination.  The echoing of the stir and
crackling of the fire was no sort of comfort to me.  The shadow in
the alcove at the end of the room began to display that undefinable
quality of a presence, that odd suggestion of a lurking living thing
that comes so easily in silence and solitude.  And to reassure
myself, I walked with a candle into it and satisfied myself that
there was nothing tangible there.  I stood that candle upon the floor
of the alcove and left it in that position.

By this time I was in a state of considerable nervous tension,
although to my reason there was no adequate cause for my condition.
My mind, however, was perfectly clear.  I postulated quite
unreservedly that nothing supernatural could happen, and to pass the
time I began stringing some rhymes together, Ingoldsby fashion,
concerning the original legend of the place.  A few I spoke aloud,
but the echoes were not pleasant.  For the same reason I also
abandoned, after a time, a conversation with myself upon the
impossibility of ghosts and haunting.  My mind reverted to the three
old and distorted people downstairs, and I tried to keep it upon that
topic.

The sombre reds and grays of the room troubled me; even with its
seven candles the place was merely dim.  The light in the alcove
flaring in a draft, and the fire flickering, kept the shadows and
penumbra perpetually shifting and stirring in a noiseless flighty
dance.  Casting about for a remedy, I recalled the wax candles I had
seen in the corridor, and, with a slight effort, carrying a candle
and leaving the door open, I walked out into the moonlight, and
presently returned with as many as ten.  These I put in the various
knick-knacks of china with which the room was sparsely adorned, and
lit and placed them where the shadows had lain deepest, some on the
floor, some in the window recesses, arranging and rearranging them
until at last my seventeen candles were so placed that not an inch of
the room but had the direct light of at least one of them.  It
occurred to me that when the ghost came I could warn him not to trip
over them.  The room was now quite brightly illuminated.  There was
something very cheering and reassuring in these little silent
streaming flames, and to notice their steady diminution of length
offered me an occupation and gave me a reassuring sense of the
passage of time.

Even with that, however, the brooding expectation of the vigil
weighed heavily enough upon me.  I stood watching the minute hand of
my watch creep towards midnight.

Then something happened in the alcove.  I did not see the candle go
out, I simply turned and saw that the darkness was there, as one
might start and see the unexpected presence of a stranger.  The black
shadow had sprung back to its place.  "By Jove," said I aloud,
recovering from my surprise, "that draft's a strong one;" and taking
the matchbox from the table, I walked across the room in a leisurely
manner to relight the corner again.  My first match would not strike,
and as I succeeded with the second, something seemed to blink on the
wall before me.  I turned my head involuntarily and saw that the two
candles on the little table by the fireplace were extinguished.  I
rose at once to my feet.

"Odd," I said.  "Did I do that myself in a flash of
absent-mindedness?"

I walked back, relit one, and as I did so I saw the candle in the
right sconce of one of the mirrors wink and go right out, and almost
immediately its companion followed it.  The flames vanished as if the
wick had been suddenly nipped between a finger and thumb, leaving the
wick neither glowing nor smoking, but black.  While I stood gaping
the candle at the foot of the bed went out, and the shadows seemed to
take another step toward me.

"This won't do!" said I, and first one and then another candle on the
mantelshelf followed.

"What's up?" I cried, with a queer high note getting into my voice
somehow.  At that the candle on the corner of the wardrobe went out,
and the one I had relit in the alcove followed.

"Steady on!" I said, "those candles are wanted," speaking with a
half-hysterical facetiousness, and scratching away at a match the
while, "for the mantel candlesticks."  My hands trembled so much that
twice I missed the rough paper of the matchbox.  As the mantel
emerged from darkness again, two candles in the remoter end of the
room were eclipsed.  But with the same match I also relit the larger
mirror candles, and those on the floor near the doorway, so that for
the moment I seemed to gain on the extinctions.  But then in a
noiseless volley there vanished four lights at once in different
corners of the room, and I struck another match in quivering haste,
and stood hesitating whither to take it.

As I stood undecided, an invisible hand seemed to sweep out the two
candles on the table.  With a cry of terror I dashed at the alcove,
then into the corner and then into the window, relighting three as
two more vanished by the fireplace, and then, perceiving a better
way, I dropped matches on the iron-bound deedbox in the corner, and
caught up the bedroom candlestick.  With this I avoided the delay of
striking matches, but for all that the steady process of extinction
went on, and the shadows I feared and fought against returned, and
crept in upon me, first a step gained on this side of me, then on
that.  I was now almost frantic with the horror of the coming
darkness, and my self-possession deserted me.  I leaped panting from
candle to candle in a vain struggle against that remorseless advance.

I bruised myself in the thigh against the table, I sent a chair
headlong, I stumbled and fell and whisked the cloth from the table in
my fall.  My candle rolled away from me and I snatched another as I
rose.  Abruptly this was blown out as I swung it off the table by the
wind of my sudden movement, and immediately the two remaining candles
followed.  But there was light still in the room, a red light, that
streamed across the ceiling and staved off the shadows from me.  The
fire!  Of course I could still thrust my candle between the bars and
relight it!

I turned to where the flames were still dancing between the glowing
coals and splashing red reflections upon the furniture; made two
steps toward the grate, and incontinently the flames dwindled and
vanished, the glow vanished, the reflections rushed together and
disappeared, and as I thrust the candle between the bars darkness
closed upon me like the shutting of an eye, wrapped about me in a
stifling embrace, sealed my vision, and crushed the last vestiges of
self-possession from my brain.  And it was not only palpable
darkness, but intolerable terror.  The candle fell from my hands.  I
flung out my arms in a vain effort to thrust that ponderous blackness
away from me, and lifting up my voice, screamed with all my might,
once, twice, thrice.  Then I think I must have staggered to my feet.
I know I thought suddenly of the moonlit corridor, and with my head
bowed and my arms over my face, made a stumbling run for the door.

But I had forgotten the exact position of the door, and I struck
myself heavily against the corner of the bed.  I staggered back,
turned, and was either struck or struck myself against some other
bulky furnishing.  I have a vague memory of battering myself thus to
and fro in the darkness, of a heavy blow at last upon my forehead, of
a horrible sensation of falling that lasted an age, of my last
frantic effort to keep my footing, and then I remember no more.

I opened my eyes in daylight.  My head was roughly bandaged, and the
man with the withered hand was watching my face.  I looked about me
trying to remember what had happened, and for a space I could not
recollect.  I rolled my eyes into the corner and saw the old woman,
no longer abstracted, no longer terrible, pouring out some drops of
medicine from a little blue phial into a glass.  "Where am I?" I
said.  "I seem to remember you, and yet I can not remember who you
are."

They told me then, and I heard of the haunted Red Room as one who
hears a tale.  "We found you at dawn," said he, "and there was blood
on your forehead and lips."

I wondered that I had ever disliked him.  The three of them in the
daylight seemed commonplace old folk enough.  The man with the green
shade had his head bent as one who sleeps.

It was very slowly I recovered the memory of my experience.  "You
believe now," said the old man with the withered hand, "that the room
is haunted?"  He spoke no longer as one who greets an intruder, but
as one who condoles with a friend.

"Yes," said I, "the room is haunted."

"And you have seen it.  And we who have been here all our lives have
never set eyes upon it.  Because we have never dared.  Tell us, is it
truly the old earl who--"

"No," said I, "it is not."

"I told you so," said the old lady, with the glass in her hand.  "It
is his poor young countess who was frightened--"

"It is not," I said.  "There is neither ghost of earl nor ghost of
countess in that room; there is no ghost there at all, but worse, far
worse, something impalpable--"

"Well?" they said.

"The worst of all the things that haunt poor mortal men," said I;
"and that is, in all its nakedness--'Fear!'  Fear that will not have
light nor sound, that will not bear with reason, that deafens and
darkens and overwhelms.  It followed me through the corridor, it
fought against me in the room--"

I stopped abruptly.  There was an interval of silence.  My hand went
up to my bandages.  "The candles went out one after another, and I
fled--"

Then the man with the shade lifted his face sideways to see me and
spoke.

"That is it," said he.  "I knew that was it.  A Power of Darkness.
To put such a curse upon a home!  It lurks there always.  You can
feel it even in the daytime, even of a bright summer's day, in the
hangings, in the curtains, keeping behind you however you face about.
In the dusk it creeps in the corridor and follows you, so that you
dare not turn.  It is even as you say.  Fear itself is in that room.
Black Fear...  And there it will be ... so long as this house of sin
endures."




THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

BY RUDYARD KIPLING

_Joseph Rudyard Kipling was born in Bombay in 1865.  The grandson of
a clergyman, both on his father's and mother's side, he was educated
in England and served his apprenticeship as a writer on the
newspapers in India.  No man ever tried harder to convey to his
reader the sensation and very pulse of life that he himself felt than
did Kipling in his early work, of which "The Phantom 'Rickshaw" is a
well-known example.  Though he is undoubtedly one of the great
writers of short stories, we are still too near him to be able to
clearly appreciate his great talents._



THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

By RUDYARD KIPLING

My doctor tells me that I need rest and change of air.  It is not
improbable that I shall get both ere long--rest that neither the
red-coated messenger nor the midday gun can break, and change of air
far beyond that which any homeward-bound steamer can give me.  In the
meantime, I am resolved to stay where I am; and, in flat defiance of
my doctor's orders, to take all the world into my confidence.  You
shall learn for yourselves the precise nature of my malady; and
shall, too, judge for yourselves whether any man born of woman on
this weary earth was ever so tormented as I.

Speaking now as a condemned criminal might speak ere the drop-bolts
are drawn, my story, wild and hideously improbable as it may appear,
demands at least attention.  That it will ever receive credence I
utterly disbelieve.  Two months ago I should have scouted as mad or
drunk the man who had dared tell me the like.  Two months ago I was
the happiest man in India.  To-day, from Peshawur to the sea, there
is no one more wretched.  My doctor and I are the only two who know
this.  His explanation is, that my brain, digestion, and eyesight are
all slightly affected; giving rise to my frequent and persistent
"delusions."  Delusions, indeed!  I call him a fool; but he attends
me still with the same unwearied smile, the same bland professional
manner, the same neatly trimmed red whiskers, till I begin to suspect
that I am an ungrateful, evil-tempered invalid.  But you shall judge
for yourselves.

Three years ago it was my fortune--my great misfortune--to sail from
Gravesend to Bombay, on return from long leave, with one Agnes
Keith-Wessington, wife of an officer on the Bombay side.  It does not
in the least concern you to know what manner of woman she was.  Be
content with the knowledge that, ere the voyage had ended, both she
and I were desperately and unreasonably in love with each other.
Heaven knows that I can make the admission now without one particle
of vanity.  In matters of this sort there is always one who gives and
another who accepts.  From the first day of our ill-omened
attachment, I was conscious that Agnes's passion was a stronger, a
more dominant, and--if I may use the expression--a purer sentiment
than mine.  Whether she recognized the fact then, I do not know.
Afterward it was bitterly plain to both of us.

Arrived at Bombay in the spring of the year, we went our respective
ways, to meet no more for the next three or four months, when my
leave and her love took us both to Simla.  There we spent the season
together; and there my fire of straw burned itself out to a pitiful
end with the closing year.  I attempt no excuse.  I make no apology.
Mrs. Wessington had given up much for my sake, and was prepared to
give up all.  From my own lips, in August, 1882, she learned that I
was sick of her presence, tired of her company, and weary of the
sound of her voice.  Ninety-nine women out of a hundred would have
wearied of me as I wearied of them; seventy-five of that number would
have promptly avenged themselves by active and obtrusive flirtation
with other men.  Mrs. Wessington was the hundredth.  On her neither
my openly expressed aversion nor the cutting brutalities with which I
garnished our interviews had the least effect.

"Jack, darling!" was her one eternal cuckoo cry, "I'm sure it's all a
mistake--a hideous mistake; and we'll be good friends again some day.
_Please_ forgive me, Jack dear."

I was the offender, and I knew it.  That knowledge transformed my
pity into passive endurance, and, eventually, into blind hate--the
same instinct, I suppose, which prompts a man to savagely stamp on
the spider he has but half killed.  And with this hate in my bosom
the season of 1882 came to an end.

Next year we met again at Simla--she with her monotonous face and
timid attempts at reconciliation, and I with loathing of her in every
fibre of my frame.  Several times I could not avoid meeting her
alone; and on each occasion her words were identically the same.
Still the unreasoning wail that it was all a "mistake"; and still the
hope of eventually "making friends."  I might have seen, had I cared
to look, that that hope only was keeping her alive.  She grew more
wan and thin month by month.  You will agree with me, at least, that
such conduct would have driven any one to despair.  It was uncalled
for; childish; unwomanly.  I maintain that she was much to blame.
And again, sometimes, in the black, fever-stricken night-watches, I
have begun to think that I might have been a little kinder to her.
But that really is a "delusion."  I could not have continued
pretending to love her when I didn't; could I?  It would have been
unfair to us both.

Last year we met again--on the same terms as before.  The same weary
appeals, and the same curt answers from my lips.  At least I would
make her see how wholly wrong and hopeless were her attempts at
resuming the old relationship.  As the season wore on, we fell
apart--that is to say, she found it difficult to meet me, for I had
other and more absorbing interests to attend to.  When I think it
over quietly in my sick-room, the season of 1884 seems a confused
nightmare wherein light and shade were fantastically intermingled--my
courtship of little Kitty Mannering; my hopes, doubts, and fears; our
long rides together; my trembling avowal of attachment; her reply;
and now and again a vision of a white face flitting by in the
'rickshaw with the black and white liveries I once watched for so
earnestly; the wave of Mrs. Wessington's gloved hand; and, when she
met me alone, which was but seldom, the irksome monotony of her
appeal.  I loved Kitty Mannering; honestly, heartily loved her, and
with my love for her grew my hatred for Agnes.  In August, Kitty and
I were engaged.  The next day I met those accursed "magpie"
jhampanies at the back of Jakko, and, moved by some passing sentiment
of pity, stopped to tell Mrs. Wessington everything.  She knew it
already.

"So I hear you're engaged, Jack dear."  Then, without a moment's
pause--"I'm sure it's all a mistake--a hideous mistake.  We shall be
as good friends some day, Jack, as we ever were."

My answer might have made even a man wince.  It cut the dying woman
before me like the blow of a whip.  "Please forgive me, Jack; I
didn't mean to make you angry; but it's true, it's true!"

And Mrs. Wessington broke down completely.  I turned away and left
her to finish her journey in peace, feeling, but only for a moment or
two, that I had been an unutterably mean hound.  I looked back, and
saw that she had turned her 'rickshaw with the idea, I suppose, of
overtaking me.

The scene and its surroundings were photographed on my memory.  The
rain-swept sky (we were at the end of the wet weather), the sodden,
dingy pines, the muddy road, and the black powder-riven cliffs formed
a gloomy background against which the black and white liveries of the
jhampanies, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw and Mrs. Wessington's
down-bowed golden head stood out clearly.  She was holding her
handkerchief in her left hand and was leaning back exhausted against
the 'rickshaw cushions.  I turned my horse up a by-path near the
Sanjoylie Reservoir and literally ran away.  Once I fancied I heard a
faint call of "Jack!"  This may have been imagination.  I never
stopped to verify it.  Ten minutes later I came across Kitty on
horseback; and, in the delight of a long ride with her, forgot all
about the interview.

A week later Mrs. Wessington died, and the inexpressible burden of
her existence was removed from my life.  I went plainsward perfectly
happy.  Before three months were over I had forgotten all about her,
except that at times the discovery of some of her old letters
reminded me unpleasantly of our bygone relationship.  By January I
had disinterred what was left of our correspondence from among my
scattered belongings and had burned it.  At the beginning of April of
this year, 1885, I was at Simla--semi-deserted Simla--once more, and
was deep in lover's talks and walks with Kitty.  It was decided that
we should be married at the end of June.  You will understand,
therefore, that, loving Kitty as I did, I am not saying too much when
I pronounce myself to have been, at that time, the happiest man in
India.

Fourteen delightful days passed almost before I noticed their flight.
Then, aroused to the sense of what was proper among mortals
circumstanced as we were, I pointed out to Kitty that an
engagement-ring was the outward and visible sign of her dignity as an
engaged girl; and that she must forthwith come to Hamilton's to be
measured for one.  Up to that moment, I give you my word, we had
completely forgotten so trivial a matter.  To Hamilton's we
accordingly went on the 15th of April, 1885.  Remember that--whatever
my doctor may say to the contrary--I was then in perfect health,
enjoying a well-balanced mind and an absolutely tranquil spirit.
Kitty and I entered Hamilton's shop together, and there, regardless
of the order of affairs, I measured Kitty for the ring in the
presence of the amused assistant.  The ring was a sapphire with two
diamonds.  We then rode out down the slope that leads to the
Combermere Bridge and Peliti's shop.

While my waler was cautiously feeling his way over the loose shale,
and Kitty was laughing and chattering at my side--while all Simla,
that is to say as much of it as had then come from the plains, was
grouped round the reading-room and Peliti's veranda--I was aware that
some one, apparently at a vast distance, was calling me by my
Christian name.  It struck me that I had heard the voice before, but
when and where I could not at once determine.  In the short space it
took to cover the road between the path from Hamilton's shop and the
first plank of the Combermere Bridge I had thought over half a dozen
people who might have committed such a solecism, and had eventually
decided that it must have been some singing in my ears.  Immediately
opposite Peliti's shop my eye was arrested by the sight of four
jhampanies in "magpie" livery, pulling a yellow-paneled, cheap,
bazaar 'rickshaw.  In a moment my mind flew back to the previous
season and Mrs. Wessington with a sense of irritation and disgust.
Was it not enough that the woman was dead and done with, without her
black and white servitors reappearing to spoil the day's happiness?
Whoever employed them now I thought I would call upon, and ask as a
personal favor to change her jhampanies' livery.  I would hire the
men myself, and, if necessary, buy their coats from off their backs.
It is impossible to say here what a flood of undesirable memories
their presence evoked.

"Kitty," I cried, "there are poor Mrs. Wessington's jhampanies turned
up again!  I wonder who has them now?"

Kitty had known Mrs. Wessington slightly last season, and had always
been interested in the sickly woman.

"What?  Where?" she asked.  "I can't see them anywhere."

Even as she spoke, her horse, swerving from a laden mule, threw
himself directly in front of the advancing 'rickshaw.  I had scarcely
time to utter a word of warning when, to my unutterable horror, horse
and rider passed through men and carriage as if they had been thin
air.

"What's the matter?" cried Kitty; "what made you call out so
foolishly, Jack?  If I am engaged I don't want all creation to know
about it.  There was lots of space between the mule and the veranda;
and, if you think I can't ride--There!"

Whereupon wilful Kitty set off, her dainty little head in the air, at
a hand-gallop in the direction of the band-stand; fully expecting, as
she herself afterward told me, that I should follow her.  What was
the matter?  Nothing indeed.  Either that I was mad or drunk, or that
Simla was haunted with devils.  I reined in my impatient cob, and
turned round.  The 'rickshaw had turned too, and now stood
immediately facing me, near the left railing of the Combermere Bridge.

"Jack!  Jack, darling!" (There was no mistake about the words this
time; they rang through my brain as if they had been shouted in my
ear.) "It's some hideous mistake, I'm sure.  Please forgive me, Jack,
and let's be friends again."

The 'rickshaw-hood had fallen back, and inside, as I hope and pray
daily for the death I dread by night, sat Mrs. Keith-Wessington,
handkerchief in hand, and golden head bowed on her breast.

How long I stared motionless I do not know.  Finally, I was aroused
by my syce taking the waler's bridle and asking whether I was ill.
From the horrible to the commonplace is but a step.  I tumbled off my
horse and dashed, half fainting, into Peliti's for a glass of cherry
brandy.  There two or three couples were gathered round the
coffee-tables discussing the gossip of the day.  Their trivialities
were more comforting to me just then than the consolations of
religion could have been.  I plunged into the midst of the
conversation at once; chatted, laughed, and jested with a face (when
I caught a glimpse of it in a mirror) as white and drawn as that of a
corpse.  Three or four men noticed my condition; and, evidently
setting it down to the results of overmany pegs, charitably
endeavored to draw me apart from the rest of the loungers.  But I
refused to be led away.  I wanted the company of my kind--as a child
rushes into the midst of the dinner party after a fright in the dark.
I must have talked for about ten minutes or so, though it seemed an
eternity to me, when I heard Kitty's clear voice outside inquiring
for me.  In another minute she had entered the shop, prepared to
roundly upbraid me for failing so signally in my duties.  Something
in my face stopped her.

"Why, Jack," she cried, "what have you been doing?  What has
happened?  Are you ill?"  Thus driven into a direct lie, I said that
the sun had been a little too much for me.  It was close upon five
o'clock of a cloudy April afternoon, and the sun had been hidden all
day.  I saw my mistake as soon as the words were out of my mouth;
attempted to recover it; blundered hopelessly and followed Kitty, in
a regal rage, out-of-doors, amid the smiles of my acquaintances.  I
made some excuse (I have forgotten what) on the score of my feeling
faint; and cantered away to my hotel, leaving Kitty to finish the
ride by herself.

In my room I sat down and tried calmly to reason out the matter.
Here was I, Theobald Jack Pansay, a well-educated Bengal civilian in
the year of grace 1885, presumably sane, certainly healthy, driven in
terror from my sweetheart's side by the apparition of a woman who had
been dead and buried eight months ago.  These were facts that I could
not blink.  Nothing was further from my thought than any memory of
Mrs. Wessington when Kitty and I left Hamilton's shop.  Nothing was
more utterly commonplace than the stretch of wall opposite Peliti's.
It was broad daylight.  The road was full of people; and yet here,
look you, in defiance of every law of probability, in direct outrage
of Nature's ordinance, there had appeared to me a face from the grave.

Kitty's Arab had gone through the 'rickshaw; so that my first hope
that some woman marvelously like Mrs. Wessington had hired the
carriage and the coolies with their old livery was lost.  Again and
again I went round this treadmill of thought; and again and again
gave up, baffled and in despair.  The voice was as inexplicable as
the apparition.  I had originally some wild notion of confiding it
all to Kitty; of begging her to marry me at once; and in her arms
defying the ghostly occupant of the 'rickshaw.  "After all," I
argued, "the presence of the 'rickshaw is in itself enough to prove
the existence of a spectral illusion.  One may see ghosts of men and
women, but surely never of coolies and carriages.  The whole thing is
absurd.  Fancy the ghost of a hill-man!"

Next morning I sent a penitent note to Kitty, imploring her to
overlook my strange conduct of the previous afternoon.  My divinity
was still very wroth, and a personal apology was necessary.  I
explained, with a fluency born of night-long pondering over a
falsehood, that I had been attacked with a sudden palpitation of the
heart--the result of indigestion.  This eminently practical solution
had its effect; and Kitty and I rode out that afternoon with the
shadow of my first lie dividing us.

Nothing could please her save a canter round Jakko.  With my nerves
still unstrung from the previous night, I feebly protested against
the notion, suggesting Observatory Hill, Jutogh, the Boileaugunge
road--anything rather than the Jakko round.  Kitty was angry and a
little hurt; so I yielded from fear of provoking further
misunderstanding, and we set out together toward Chota Simla.  We
walked a greater part of the way, and, according to our custom,
cantered from a mile or so below the convent to the stretch of level
road by the Sanjowlie Reservoir.  The wretched horses appeared to
fly, and my heart beat quicker and quicker as we neared the crest of
the ascent.  My mind had been full of Mrs. Wessington all the
afternoon; and every inch of the Jakko road bore witness to our
old-time walks and talks.  The boulders were full of it; the pines
sung it aloud overhead; the rain-fed torrent giggled and chuckled
unseen over the shameful story; and the wind in my ears chanted the
iniquity aloud.

As a fitting climax, in the middle of the level men call the Lady's
Mile, the horror was awaiting me.  No other 'rickshaw was in
sight--only the four black and white jhampanies, the yellow-paneled
carriage, and the golden head of a woman within--all apparently just
as I had left them eight months and one fortnight ago!  For an
instant I fancied that Kitty must see what I saw--we were so
marvelously sympathetic in all things.  Her next words undeceived
me--"Not a soul in sight!  Come along, Jack, and I'll race you to the
reservoir buildings!"  Her wiry little Arab was off like a bird, my
waler following close behind, and in this order we dashed under the
cliffs.  Half a minute brought us within fifty yards of the
'rickshaw.  I pulled my waler and fell back a little.  The 'rickshaw
was directly in the middle of the road; and once more the Arab passed
through it, my horse following.  "Jack!  Jack, dear!  Please forgive
me," rang with a wail in my ears, and, after an interval: "It's all a
mistake, a hideous mistake!"

I spurred my horse like a man possessed.  When I turned my head at
the reservoir works, the black and white liveries were still
waiting--patiently waiting--under the gray hillside, and the wind
brought me a mocking echo of the words I had just heard.  Kitty
bantered me a good deal on my silence throughout the remainder of the
ride.  I had been talking up till then wildly and at random.  To save
my life I could not speak naturally afterward, and from Sanjowlie to
the church wisely held my tongue.

I was to dine with the Mannerings that night, and had barely time to
canter home to dress.  On the road to Elysium Hill I overheard two
men talking together in the dusk--"It's a curious thing," said one,
"how completely all trace of it disappeared.  You know my wife was
insanely fond of the woman (never could see anything in her myself),
and wanted me to pick up her old 'rickshaw and coolies if they were
to be got for love or money.  Morbid sort of fancy I call it; but
I've got to do what the Memsahib tells me.  Would you believe that
the man she hired it from tells me that all four of the men--they
were brothers--died of cholera on the way to Hardwar, poor devils;
and the 'rickshaw has been broken up by the man himself.  Told me he
never used a dead Memsahib's 'rickshaw.  Spoiled his luck.  Queer
notion, wasn't it?  Fancy poor little Mrs. Wessington spoiling any
one's luck except her own!"  I laughed aloud at this point; and my
laugh jarred on me as I uttered it.  So there were ghosts of
'rickshaws after all, and ghostly employments in the other world!
How much did Mrs. Wessington give her men?  What were their hours?
Where did they go?

And for visible answer to my last question I saw the infernal thing
blocking my path in the twilight.  The dead travel fast, and by short
cuts unknown to ordinary coolies.  I laughed aloud a second time and
checked my laughter suddenly, for I was afraid I was going mad.  Mad
to a certain extent I must have been, for I recollect that I reined
in my horse at the head of the 'rickshaw, and politely wished Mrs.
Wessington "Good-evening."  Her answer was one I knew only too well.
I listened to the end; and replied that I had heard it all before,
but should be delighted if she had anything further to say.  Some
malignant devil stronger than I must have entered into me that
evening, for I have a dim recollection of talking the commonplaces of
the day for five minutes to the thing in front of me.

"Mad as a hatter, poor devil--or drunk.  Max, try and get him to come
home."

Surely that was not Mrs. Wessington's voice!  The two men had
overheard me speaking to the empty air, and had returned to look
after me.  They were very kind and considerate, and from their words
evidently gathered that I was extremely drunk.  I thanked them
confusedly and cantered away to my hotel, there changed, and arrived
at the Mannerings' ten minutes late.  I pleaded the darkness of the
night as an excuse; was rebuked by Kitty for my unlover-like
tardiness; and sat down.

The conversation had already become general; and under cover of it I
was addressing some tender small-talk to my sweetheart when I was
aware that at the further end of the table a short, red-whiskered man
was describing, with much broidery, his encounter with a man unknown
that evening.  A few sentences convinced me that he was repeating the
incident of half an hour ago.  In the middle of the story he looked
round for applause, as professional story-tellers do, caught my eyes,
and straightway collapsed.  There was a moment's awkward silence, and
the red-whiskered man muttered something to the effect that he had
"forgotten the rest," thereby sacrificing a reputation as a good
story-teller which he had built up for six seasons past.  I blessed
him from the bottom of my heart, and--went on with my fish.

In the fulness of time that dinner came to an end; and with genuine
regret I tore myself away from Kitty--as certain as I was of my own
existence that It would be waiting for me outside the door.  The
red-whiskered man, who had been introduced to me as Dr. Heatherlegh
of Simla, volunteered to bear me company as far as our roads lay
together.  I accepted his offer with gratitude.

My instinct had not deceived me.  It lay in readiness in the Mall,
and, in what seemed devilish mockery of our ways, with a lighted
head-lamp.  The red-whiskered man went to the point at once, in a
manner that showed he had been thinking over it all dinner-time.

"I say, Pansay, what the deuce was the matter with you this evening
on the Elysium road?"  The suddenness of the question wrenched an
answer from me before I was aware.

"That!" said I, pointing to It.

"That may be either D. T. or Eyes for aught I know.  Now, you don't
liquor.  I saw as much at dinner, so it can't be D. T.  There's
nothing whatever where you're pointing, though you're sweating and
trembling with fright like a scared pony.  Therefore, I conclude that
it's Eyes.  And I ought to understand all about them.  Come along
home with me.  I'm on the Blessington lower road."

To my intense delight the 'rickshaw, instead of waiting for us, kept
about twenty yards ahead--and this, too, whether we walked, trotted,
or cantered.  In the course of that long night ride I had told my
companion almost as much as I have told you here.

"Well, you've spoiled one of the best tales I've ever laid tongue
to," said he, "but I'll forgive you for the sake of what you've gone
through.  Now, come home and do what I tell you; and when I've cured
you, young man, let this be a lesson to you to steer clear of women
and indigestible food till the day of your death."

The 'rickshaw kept steady in front; and my red-whiskered friend
seemed to derive great pleasure from my account of its exact
whereabout.

"Eyes, Pansay--all Eyes, Brain, and Stomach.  And the greatest of
these three is Stomach.  You've too much conceited brain, too little
stomach, and thoroughly unhealthy eyes.  Get your stomach straight
and the rest follows.  And all that's French for a liver pill.  I'll
take sole medical charge of you from this hour! for you're too
interesting a phenomenon to be passed over."

By this time we were deep in the shadow of the Blessington lower road
and the 'rickshaw came to a dead stop under a pine-clad, overhanging
shale cliff.  Instinctively I halted, too, giving my reason.
Heatherlegh rapped out an oath.

"Now, if you think I'm going to spend a cold night on the hillside
for the sake of a Stomach-cum-Brain-cum-Eye illusion ... Lord ha'
mercy!  What's that?"

There was a muffled report, a blinding smother of dust just in front
of us, a crack, the noise of rent boughs, and about ten yards of the
cliff-side--pines, undergrowth, and all--slid down into the road
below, completely blocking it up.  The uprooted trees swayed and
tottered for a moment like drunken giants in the gloom, and then fell
prone among their fellows with a thunderous crash.  Our two horses
stood motionless and sweating with fear.  As soon as the rattle of
falling earth and stone had subsided, my companion muttered: "Man, if
we'd gone forward we should have been ten feet deep in our graves by
now.  'There are more things in heaven and earth--'  Come home,
Pansay, and thank God.  I want a peg badly."

We retraced our way over the Church Ridge, and I arrived at Dr.
Heatherlegh's house shortly after midnight.

His attempts toward my cure commenced almost immediately, and for a
week I never left his sight.  Many a time in the course of that week
did I bless the good fortune which had thrown me in contact with
Simla's best and kindest doctor.  Day by day my spirits grew lighter
and more equable.  Day by day, too, I became more and more inclined
to fall in with Heatherlegh's "spectral illusion" theory, implicating
eyes, brain, and stomach.  I wrote to Kitty, telling her that a
slight sprain caused by a fall from my horse kept me indoors for a
few days; and that I should be recovered before she had time to
regret my absence.

Heatherlegh's treatment was simple to a degree.  It consisted of
liver pills, cold water baths, and strong exercise, taken in the dusk
or at early dawn--for, as he sagely observed: "A man with a sprained
ankle doesn't walk a dozen miles a day, and your young woman might be
wondering if she saw you."

At the end of the week, after much examination of pupil and pulse,
and strict injunctions as to diet and pedestrianism, Heatherlegh
dismissed me as bruskly as he had taken charge of me.  Here is his
parting benediction: "Man, I certify to your mental cure, and that's
as much as to say I've cured most of your bodily ailments.  Now, get
your traps out of this as soon as you can; and be off to make love to
Miss Kitty."

I was endeavoring to express my thanks for his kindness.  He cut me
short.

"Don't think I did this because I like you.  I gather that you've
behaved like a blackguard all through.  But, all the same, you're a
phenomenon, and as queer a phenomenon as you are a blackguard.
No!"--checking me a second time--"not a rupee, please.  Go out and
see if you can find the eyes-brain-and-stomach business again.  I'll
give you a lakh for each time you see it."

Half an hour later I was in the Mannerings' drawing-room with
Kitty--drunk with the intoxication of present happiness and the
foreknowledge that I should never more be troubled with Its hideous
presence.  Strong in the sense of my new-found security, I proposed a
ride at once; and, by preference, a canter round Jakko.

Never had I felt so well, so overladen with vitality and mere animal
spirits, as I did on the afternoon of the 30th of April.  Kitty was
delighted at the change in my appearance, and complimented me on it
in her delightfully frank and outspoken manner.  We left the
Mannerings' house together, laughing and talking, and cantered along
the Chota Simla road as of old.

I was in haste to reach the Sanjowlie Reservoir and there make my
assurance doubly sure.  The horses did their best, but seemed all too
slow to my impatient mind.  Kitty was astonished at my
boisterousness.  "Why, Jack!" she cried at last, "you are behaving
like a child.  What are you doing?"

We were just below the convent, and from sheer wantonness I was
making my waler plunge and curvet across the road as I tickled it
with the loop of my riding-whip.

"Doing?" I answered; "nothing, dear.  That's just it.  If you'd been
doing nothing for a week except lie up, you'd be as riotous as I.

  "'Singing and murmuring in your feastful mirth,
    Joying to feel yourself alive;
  Lord over Nature, Lord of the visible Earth,
    Lord of the senses five.'"


My quotation was hardly out of my lips before we had rounded the
corner above the convent, and a few yards further on could see across
to Sanjowlie.  In the centre of the level road stood the black and
white liveries, the yellow-paneled 'rickshaw, and Mrs.
Keith-Wessington.  I pulled up, looked, rubbed my eyes, and, I
believe, must have said something.  The next thing I knew was that I
was lying face downward on the road, with Kitty kneeling above me in
tears.

"Has it gone, child?" I gasped.  Kitty only wept more bitterly.

"Has what gone, Jack dear?  What does it all mean?  There must be a
mistake somewhere, Jack.  A hideous mistake."  Her last words brought
me to my feet--mad--raving for the time being.

"Yes, there is a mistake somewhere," I repeated, "a hideous mistake.
Come and look at It."

I have an indistinct idea that I dragged Kitty by the wrist along the
road up to where It stood, and implored her for pity's sake to speak
to It; to tell It that we were betrothed; that neither death nor hell
could break the tie between us; and Kitty only knows how much more to
the same effect.  Now and again I appealed passionately to the terror
in the 'rickshaw to bear witness to all I had said, and to release me
from a torture that was killing me.  As I talked I suppose I must
have told Kitty of my old relations with Mrs. Wessington, for I saw
her listen intently with white face and blazing eyes.

"Thank you, Mr. Pansay," she said, "that's quite enough.  Syce ghora
l√°o."

The syces, impassive as Orientals always are, had come up with the
recaptured horses; and as Kitty sprang into her saddle I caught hold
of the bridle, entreating her to hear me out and forgive.  My answer
was the cut of her riding-whip across my face from mouth to eye, and
a word or two of farewell that even now I can not write down.  So I
judged, and judged rightly, that Kitty knew all; and I staggered back
to the side of the 'rickshaw.  My face was cut and bleeding, and the
blow of the riding-whip had raised a livid blue wheal on it.  I had
no self-respect.  Just then, Heatherlegh, who must have been
following Kitty and me at a distance, cantered up.

"Doctor," I said, pointing to my face, "here's Miss Mannering's
signature to my order of dismissal, and I'll thank you for that lakh
as soon as convenient."

Heatherlegh's face, even in my abject misery, moved me to laughter.

"I'll stake my professional reputation--" he began.

"Don't be a fool," I whispered.  "I've lost my life's happiness and
you'd better take me home."

As I spoke the 'rickshaw was gone.  Then I lost all knowledge of what
was passing.  The crest of Jakko seemed to heave and roll like the
crest of a cloud and fall in upon me.

Seven days later (on the 7th of May, that is to say) I was aware that
I was lying in Heatherlegh's room as weak as a little child.
Heatherlegh was watching me intently from behind the papers on his
writing-table.  His first words were not encouraging; but I was too
far spent to be much moved by them.

"Here's Miss Kitty has sent back your letters.  You corresponded a
good deal, you young people.  Here's a packet that looks like a ring,
and a cheerful sort of a note from Mannering Papa, which I've taken
the liberty of reading and burning.  The old gentleman's not pleased
with you."

"And Kitty?" I asked dully.

"Rather more drawn than her father from what she says.  By the same
token you must have been letting out any number of queer
reminiscences just before I met you.  Says that a man who would have
behaved to a woman as you did to Mrs. Wessington ought to kill
himself out of sheer pity for his kind.  She's a hot-headed little
virago, your mash.  Will have it too that you were suffering from D.
T. when that row on the Jakko road turned up.  Says she'll die before
she ever speaks to you again."

I groaned and turned over on the other side.

"Now, you've got your choice, my friend.  This engagement has to be
broken off; and the Mannerings don't want to be too hard on you.  Was
it broken through D. T. or epileptic fits?  Sorry I can't offer you a
better exchange unless you'd prefer hereditary insanity.  Say the
word and I'll tell 'em it's fits.  All Simla knows about that scene
on the Ladies' Mile.  Come!  I'll give you five minutes to think over
it."

During those five minutes I believe that I explored thoroughly the
lowest circles of the Inferno which it is permitted man to tread on
earth.  And at the same time I myself was watching myself faltering
through the dark labyrinths of doubt, misery, and utter despair.  I
wondered, as Heatherlegh in his chair might have wondered, which
dreadful alternative I should adopt.  Presently I heard myself
answering in a voice that I hardly recognized:

"They're confoundedly particular about morality in these parts.  Give
'em fits, Heatherlegh, and my love.  Now, let me sleep a bit longer."

Then my two selves joined, and it was only I (half crazed,
devil-driven I) that tossed in my bed, tracing step by step the
history of the past month.

"But I am in Simla," I kept repeating to myself.  "I, Jack Pansay, am
in Simla, and there are no ghosts here.  It's unreasonable of that
woman to pretend there are.  Why couldn't Agnes have left me alone?
I never did her any harm.  It might just as well have been me as
Agnes.  Only I'd never have come back on purpose to kill her.  Why
can't I be left alone--left alone and happy?"

It was high noon when I first awoke; and the sun was low in the sky
before I slept--slept as the tortured criminal sleeps on his rack,
too worn to feel further pain.

Next day I could not leave my bed.  Heatherlegh told me in the
morning that he had received an answer from Mr. Mannering, and that,
thanks to his (Heatherlegh's) friendly offices, the story of my
affliction had traveled through the length and breadth of Simla,
where I was on all sides much pitied.

"And that's rather more than you deserve," he concluded, pleasantly,
"though the Lord knows you've been going through a pretty severe
mill.  Never mind; we'll cure you yet, you perverse phenomenon."

I declined firmly to be cured.  "You've been much too good to me
already, old man," said I; "but I don't think I need trouble you
further."

In my heart I knew that nothing Heatherlegh could do would lighten
the burden that had been laid upon me.

With that knowledge came also a sense of hopeless, impotent rebellion
against the unreasonableness of it all.  There were scores of men no
better than I whose punishments had at least been reserved for
another world; and I felt that it was bitterly, cruelly unfair that I
alone should have been singled out for so hideous a fate.  This mood
would in time give place to another where it seemed that the
'rickshaw and I were the only realities in a world of shadows; that
Kitty was a ghost; that Mannering, Heatherlegh, and all the other men
and women I knew were all ghosts; and the great, gray hills
themselves but vain shadows devised to torture me.  From mood to mood
I tossed backward and forward for seven weary days; my body growing
daily stronger and stronger, until the bedroom looking-glass told me
that I had returned to every day life, and was as other men once
more.  Curiously enough my face showed no signs of the struggle I had
gone through.  It was pale indeed, but as expressionless and
commonplace as ever.  I had expected some permanent
alteration--visible evidence of the disease that was eating me away.
I found nothing.

On the 15th of May I left Heatherlegh's house at eleven o'clock in
the morning; and the instinct of the bachelor drove me to the club.
There I found that every man knew my story as told by Heatherlegh,
and was, in clumsy fashion, abnormally kind and attentive.
Nevertheless, I recognized that for the rest of my natural life I
should be among but not of my fellows; and I envied very bitterly
indeed the laughing coolies on the Mall below.  I lunched at the
club, and at four o'clock wandered aimlessly down the Mall in the
vague hope of meeting Kitty.  Close to the band-stand the black and
white liveries joined me; and I heard Mrs. Wessington's old appeal at
my side.  I had been expecting this ever since I came out; and was
only surprised at her delay.  The phantom 'rickshaw and I went side
by side along the Chota Simla road in silence.  Close to the bazaar,
Kitty and a man on horseback overtook and passed us.  For any sign
she gave I might have been a dog in the road.  She did not even pay
me the compliment of quickening her pace; though the rainy afternoon
had served for an excuse.

So Kitty and her companion, and I and my ghostly light-o'-love, crept
round Jakko in couples.  The road was streaming with water; the pines
dripped like roof-pipes on the rocks below, and the air was full of
fine, driving rain.  Two or three times I found myself saying to
myself almost aloud: "I'm Jack Pansay on leave at Simla--at Simla!
Everyday, ordinary Simla.  I mustn't forget that--I mustn't forget
that."  Then I would try to recollect some of the gossip I had heard
at the club; the prices of So-and-So's horses--anything, in fact,
that related to the workaday Anglo-Indian world I knew so well.  I
even repeated the multiplication table rapidly to myself, to make
quite sure that I was not taking leave of my senses.  It gave me much
comfort; and must have prevented my hearing Mrs. Wessington for a
time.

Once more I wearily climbed the convent slope and entered the level
road.  Here Kitty and the man started off at a canter, and I was left
alone with Mrs. Wessington.  "Agnes," said I, "will you put back your
hood and tell me what it all means?"  The hood dropped noiselessly,
and I was face to face with my dead and buried mistress.  She was
wearing the dress in which I had last seen her alive; carried the
same tiny handkerchief in her right hand, and the same card-case in
her left.  (A woman eight months dead with a card-case!)  I had to
pin myself down to the multiplication table, and to set both hands on
the stone parapet of the road, to assure myself that at least was
real.

"Agnes," I repeated, "for pity's sake tell me what it all means."
Mrs. Wessington leaned forward, with that odd, quick turn of the head
I used to know so well, and spoke.

If my story had not already so madly overleaped the bounds of all
human belief I should apologize to you now.  As I know that no
one--no, not even Kitty, for whom it is written as some sort of
justification of my conduct--will believe me, I will go on.  Mrs.
Wessington spoke and I walked with her from the Sanjowlie road to the
turning below the Commander-in-chief's house as I might walk by the
side of any living woman's 'rickshaw, deep in conversation.  The
second and most tormenting of my moods of sickness had suddenly laid
hold upon me, and, like the prince in Tennyson's poem, "I seemed to
move amid a world of ghosts."  There had been a garden-party at the
commander-in-chief's, and we two joined the crowd of homeward-bound
folk.  As I saw them then it seemed that they were the
shadows--impalpable fantastic shadows--that divided for Mrs.
Wessington's 'rickshaw to pass through.  What we said during the
course of that weird interview I can not--indeed, I dare not--tell.
Heatherlegh's comment would have been a short laugh and a remark that
I had been "mashing a brain-eye-and-stomach chimera."  It was a
ghastly and yet in some indefinable way a marvelously dear
experience.  Could it be possible, I wondered, that I was in this
life to woo a second time the woman I had killed by my own neglect
and cruelty?

I met Kitty on the homeward road--a shadow among shadows.

If I were to describe all the incidents of the next fortnight in
their order, my story would never come to an end; and your patience
would be exhausted.  Morning after morning and evening after evening
the ghostly 'rickshaw and I used to wander through Simla together.
Wherever I went there the four black and white liveries followed me
and bore me company to and from my hotel.  At the theatre I found
them amid the crowd of yelling jhampanies; outside the club veranda,
after a long evening of whist; at the birthday ball, waiting
patiently for my reappearance; and in broad daylight when I went
calling.  Save that it cast no shadow, the 'rickshaw was in every
respect as real to look upon as one of wood and iron.  More than
once, indeed, I have had to check myself from warning some
hard-riding friend against cantering over it.  More than once I have
walked down the Mall deep in conversation with Mrs. Wessington to the
unspeakable amazement of the passers-by.

Before I had been out and about a week I learned that the "fit"
theory had been discarded in favor of insanity.  However, I made no
change in my mode of life.  I called, rode, and dined out as freely
as ever.  I had a passion for the society of my kind which I had
never felt before; I hungered to be among the realities of life; and
at the same time I felt vaguely unhappy when I had been separated too
long from my ghostly companion.  It would be almost impossible to
describe my varying moods from the 15th of May up to to-day.

The presence of the 'rickshaw filled me by turns with horror, blind
fear, a dim sort of pleasure, and utter despair.  I dared not leave
Simla; and I knew that my stay there was killing me.  I knew,
moreover, that it was my destiny to die slowly and a little every
day.  My only anxiety was to get the penance over as quietly as might
be.  Alternately I hungered for a sight of Kitty and watched her
outrageous flirtations with my successor--to speak more accurately,
my successors--with amused interest.  She was as much out of my life
as I was out of hers.  By day I wandered with Mrs. Wessington almost
content.  By night I implored Heaven to let me return to the world as
I used to know it.

Above all these varying moods lay the sensation of dull, numbing
wonder that the Seen and the Unseen should mingle so strangely on
this earth to hound one poor soul to its grave.

. . . . . . . . . . .

August 27.--Heatherlegh has been indefatigable in his attendance on
me; and only yesterday told me that I ought to send in an application
for sick leave.  An application to escape the company of a phantom!
A request that the government would graciously permit me to get rid
of five ghosts and an airy 'rickshaw by going to England!
Heatherlegh's proposition moved me to almost hysterical laughter.  I
told him that I should await the end quietly at Simla; and I am sure
that the end is not far off.  Believe me that I dread its advent more
than any word can say; and I torture myself nightly with a thousand
speculations as to the manner of my death.

Shall I die in my bed decently and as an English gentleman should
die; or, in one last walk on the Mall, will my soul be wrenched from
me to take its place forever and ever by the side of that ghastly
phantasm?  Shall I return to my old lost allegiance in the next
world, or shall I meet Agnes, loathing her and bound to her side
through all eternity?  Shall we two hover over the scene of our lives
till the end of Time?  As the day of my death draws nearer, the
intense horror that all living flesh feels toward escaped spirits
from beyond the grave grows more and more powerful.  It is an awful
thing to go down quick among the dead with scarcely one-half of your
life completed.  It is a thousand times more awful to wait as I do in
your midst, for I know not what unimaginable terror.  Pity me, at
least on the score of my "delusion," for I know you will never
believe what I have written here.  Yet as surely as ever a man was
done to death by the Powers of Darkness I am that man.

In justice, too, pity her.  For as surely as ever woman was killed by
man, I killed Mrs. Wessington.  And the last portion of my punishment
is even now upon me.




THE ROLL-CALL OF THE REEF

BY A. T. QUILLER-COUCH ("Q.")

_"Q." is the signature of Arthur Thomas Quiller-Couch, born in
Cornwall in 1863.  No English novelist of the present generation
upholds more evenly and consistently than he the best traditions of
the art of story-writing, both in elevation of theme and dignity of
style.  His imagination attains the dramatic quality by strength and
purity rather than by eccentricity and abnormality.  For these
reasons he was chosen to complete Robert Louis Stevenson's novel "St.
Ives," left unfinished on the death of the author._



THE ROLL-CALL OF THE REEF

By A. T. QUILLER-COUCH

"Yes, sir," said my host, the quarryman, reaching down the relics
from their hook in the wall over the chimneypiece; "they've hung here
all my time, and most of my father's.  The women won't touch 'em;
they're afraid of the story.  So here they'll dangle, and gather dust
and smoke, till another tenant comes and tosses 'em out o' doors for
rubbish.  Whew! 'tis coarse weather, surely."

He went to the door, opened it, and stood studying the gale that beat
upon his cottage-front, straight from the Manacle Reef.  The rain
drove past him into the kitchen, aslant like threads of gold silk in
the shine of the wreck-wood fire.  Meanwhile, by the same firelight,
I examined the relics on my knee.  The metal of each was tarnished
out of knowledge.  But the trumpet was evidently an old cavalry
trumpet, and the threads of its party-colored sling, though fretted
and dusty, still hung together.  Around the side-drum, beneath its
cracked brown varnish, I could hardly trace a royal coat-of-arms and
a legend running, "Per Mare Per Terram"--the motto of the marines.
Its parchment, though black and scented with wood-smoke, was limp and
mildewed; and I began to tighten up the straps--under which the
drumsticks had been loosely thrust--with the idle purpose of trying
if some music might be got out of the old drum yet.

But as I turned it on my knee, I found the drum attached to the
trumpet-sling by a curious barrel-shaped padlock, and paused to
examine this.  The body of the lock was composed of half a dozen
brass rings, set accurately edge to edge; and, rubbing the brass with
my thumb, I saw that each of the six had a series of letters engraved
around it.

I knew the trick of it, I thought.  Here was one of those word
padlocks, once so common; only to be opened by getting the rings to
spell a certain word, which the dealer confides to you.

My host shut and barred the door, and came back to the hearth.

"'Twas just such a wind--east by south--that brought in what you've
got between your hands.  Back in the year 'nine, it was; my father
has told me the tale a score o' times.  You're twisting round the
rings, I see.  But you'll never guess the word.  Parson Kendall, he
made the word, and he locked down a couple o' ghosts in their graves
with it; and when his time came he went to his own grave and took the
word with him."

"Whose ghosts, Matthew?"

"You want the story, I see, sir.  My father could tell it better than
I can.  He was a young man in the year 'nine, unmarried at the time,
and living in this very cottage, just as I be.  That's how he came to
get mixed up with the tale."

He took a chair, lighted a short pipe, and went on, with his eyes
fixed on the dancing violet flames:

"Yes, he'd ha' been about thirty year old in January, eighteen 'nine.
The storm got up in the night o' the twenty-first o' that month.  My
father was dressed and out long before daylight; he never was one to
bide in bed, let be that the gale by this time was pretty near
lifting the thatch over his head.  Besides which, he'd fenced a small
'taty-patch that winter, down by Lowland Point, and he wanted to see
if it stood the night's work.  He took the path across Gunner's
Meadow--where they buried most of the bodies afterward.  The wind was
right in his teeth at the time, and once on the way (he's told me
this often) a great strip of oarweed came flying through the darkness
and fetched him a slap on the cheek like a cold hand.  But he made
shift pretty well till he got to Lowland, and then had to drop upon
hands and knees and crawl, digging his fingers every now and then
into the shingle to hold on, for he declared to me that the stones,
some of them as big as a man's head, kept rolling and driving past
till it seemed the whole foreshore was moving westward under him.
The fence was gone, of course; not a stick left to show where it
stood; so that, when first he came to the place, he thought he must
have missed his bearings.  My father, sir, was a very religious man;
and if he reckoned the end of the world was at hand--there in the
great wind and night, among the moving stones--you may believe he was
certain of it when he heard a gun fired, and, with the same, saw a
flame shoot up out of the darkness to windward, making a sudden
fierce light in all the place about.  All he could find to think or
say was, 'The Second Coming!  The Second Coming!  The Bridegroom
cometh, and the wicked He will toss like a ball into a large
country'; and being already upon his knees, he just bowed his head
and 'bided, saying this over and over.

"But by'm by, between two squalls, he made bold to lift his head and
look, and then by the light--a bluish color 'twas--he saw all the
coast clear away to Manacle Point, and off the Manacles in the thick
of the weather, a sloop-of-war with topgallants housed, driving stern
foremost toward the reef.  It was she, of course, that was burning
the flare.  My father could see the white streak and the ports of her
quite plain as she rose to it, a little outside the breakers, and he
guessed easy enough that her captain had just managed to wear ship
and was trying to force her nose to the sea with the help of her
small bower anchor and the scrap or two of canvas that hadn't yet
been blown out of her.  But while he looked, she fell off, giving her
broadside to it foot by foot, and drifting back on the breakers
around Carn Du and the Varses.  The rocks lie so thick thereabout
that 'twas a toss up which she struck first; at any rate, my father
couldn't tell at the time, for just then the flare died down and went
out.

"Well, sir, he turned then in the dark and started back for Coverack
to cry the dismal tidings--though well knowing ship and crew to be
past any hope, and as he turned the wind lifted him and tossed him
forward 'like a ball,' as he'd been saying, and homeward along the
foreshore.  As you know, 'tis ugly work, even by daylight, picking
your way among the stones there, and my father was prettily knocked
about at first in the dark.  But by this 'twas nearer seven than six
o'clock, and the day spreading.  By the time he reached North Corner,
a man could see to read print; hows'ever, he looked neither out to
sea nor toward Coverack, but headed straight for the first
cottage--the same that stands above North Corner to-day.  A man named
Billy Ede lived there then, and when my father burst into the kitchen
bawling, 'Wreck! wreck!' he saw Billy Ede's wife, Ann, standing there
in her clogs with a shawl over her head, and her clothes wringing wet.

"'Save the chap!' says Billy Ede's wife, Ann.  'What d'ee mean by
crying stale fish at that rate?'

"'But 'tis a wreck, I tell 'ee.'

"'I've a-zeed 'n, too; and so has every one with an eye in his head.'

"And with that she pointed straight over my father's shoulder, and he
turned; and there, close under Dolor Point, at the end of Coverack
town, he saw another wreck washing, and the point black with people,
like emmets, running to and fro in the morning light.  While he stood
staring at her, he heard a trumpet sounded on board, the notes coming
in little jerks, like a bird rising against the wind; but faintly, of
course, because of the distance and the gale blowing--though this had
dropped a little.

"'She's a transport,' said Billy Ede's wife, Ann, 'and full of
horse-soldiers, fine long men.  When she struck they must ha' pitched
the horses over first to lighten the ship, for a score of dead horses
had washed in afore I left, half an hour back.  An' three or four
soldiers, too--fine long corpses in white breeches and jackets of
blue and gold.  I held the lantern to one.  Such a straight young
man!'

"My father asked her about the trumpeting.

"'That's the queerest bit of all.  She was burnin' a light when me
an' my man joined the crowd down there.  All her masts had gone;
whether they carried away, or were cut away to ease her, I don't
rightly know.  Her keelson was broke under her and her bottom sagged
and stove, and she had just settled down like a sitting hen--just the
leastest list to starboard; but a man could stand there easy.  They
had rigged up ropes across her, from bulwark to bulwark, an' beside
these the men were mustered, holding on like grim death whenever the
sea made a clean breach over them, an' standing up like heroes as
soon as it passed.  The captain an' the officers were clinging to the
rail of the quarterdeck, all in their golden uniforms, waiting for
the end as if 'twas King George they expected.  There was no way to
help, for she lay right beyond cast of line, though our folk tried it
fifty times.  And beside them clung a trumpeter, a whacking big man,
an' between the heavy seas he would lift his trumpet with one hand,
and blow a call; and every time he blew the men gave a cheer.  There
[she says]--hark 'ee now--there he goes agen!  But you won't hear no
cheering any more, for few are left to cheer, and their voices weak.
Bitter cold the wind is, and I reckon it numbs their grip o' the
ropes, for they were dropping off fast with every sea when my man
sent me home to get his breakfast.  Another wreck, you say?  Well,
there's no hope for the tender dears, if 'tis the Manacles.  You'd
better run down and help yonder; though 'tis little help any man can
give.  Not one came in alive while I was there.  The tide's flowing,
an' she won't hold together another hour, they say.'

"Well, sure enough, the end was coming fast when my father got down
to the point.  Six men had been cast up alive, or just breathing--a
seaman and five troopers.  The seaman was the only one that had
breath to speak; and while they were carrying him into the town, the
word went round that the ship's name was the 'Despatch,' transport,
homeward-bound from Corunna, with a detachment of the Seventh
Hussars, that had been fighting out there with Sir John Moore.  The
seas had rolled her further over by this time, and given her decks a
pretty sharp slope; but a dozen men still held on, seven by the ropes
near the ship's waist, a couple near the break of the poop, and three
on the quarterdeck.  Of these three my father made out one to be the
skipper; close by him clung an officer in full regimentals--his name,
they heard after, was Captain Duncanfield; and last came the tall
trumpeter; and if you'll believe me, the fellow was making shift
there, at the very last, to blow 'God Save the King.'  What's more,
he got to 'Send us victorious,' before an extra big sea came bursting
across and washed them off the deck--every man but one of the pair
beneath the poop--and he dropped his hold before the next wave; being
stunned, I reckon.  The others went out of sight at once, but the
trumpeter--being, as I said, a powerful man as well as a tough
swimmer--rose like a duck, rode out a couple of breakers, and came in
on the crest of the third.  The folks looked to see him broke like an
egg at their very feet; but when the smother cleared, there he was,
lying face downward on a ledge below them; and one of the men that
happened to have a rope round him--I forget the fellow's name, if I
ever heard it--jumped down and grabbed him by the ankle as he began
to slip back.  Before the next big sea, the pair were hauled high
enough to be out of harm, and another heave brought them up to grass.
Quick work, but master trumpeter wasn't quite dead; nothing worse
than a cracked head and three staved ribs.  In twenty minutes or so
they had him in bed, with the doctor to tend him.

"Now was the time--nothing being left alive upon the transport--for
my father to tell of the sloop he'd seen driving upon the Manacles.
And when he got a hearing, though the most were set upon salvage, and
believed a wreck in the hand, so to say, to be worth half a dozen
they couldn't see, a good few volunteered to start off with him and
have a look.  They crossed Lowland Point; no ship to be seen on the
Manacles nor anywhere upon the sea.  One or two was for calling my
father a liar.  'Wait till we come to Dean Point,' said he.  Sure
enough, on the far side of Dean Point they found the sloop's mainmast
washing about with half a dozen men lashed to it, men in red jackets,
every mother's son drowned and staring; and a little further on, just
under the Dean, three or four bodies cast up on the shore, one of
them a small drummer-boy, side-drum and all; and near by part of a
ship's gig, with 'H.M.S. Primrose' cut on the stern-board.  From this
point on the shore was littered thick with wreckage and dead
bodies--the most of them marines in uniform--and in Godrevy Cove, in
particular, a heap of furniture from the captain's cabin, and among
it a water-tight box, not much damaged, and full of papers, by which,
when it came to be examined, next day, the wreck was easily made out
to be the 'Primrose,' of eighteen guns, outward bound from
Portsmouth, with a fleet of transports for the Spanish war--thirty
sail, I've heard, but I've never heard what became of them.  Being
handled by merchant skippers, no doubt they rode out the gale, and
reached the Tagus safe and sound.  Not but what the captain of the
'Primrose'--Mein was his name--did quite right to try and club-haul
his vessel when he found himself under the land; only he never ought
to have got there, if he took proper soundings.  But it's easy
talking.

"The 'Primrose,' sir, was a handsome vessel--for her size one of the
handsomest in the King's service--and newly fitted out at Plymouth
Dock.  So the boys had brave pickings from her in the way of
brass-work, ship's instruments, and the like, let alone some barrels
of stores not much spoiled.  They loaded themselves with as much as
they could carry, and started for home, meaning to make a second
journey before the preventive men got wind of their doings, and came
to spoil the fun.  'Hullo!' says my father, and dropped his gear, 'I
do believe there's a leg moving?' and running fore, he stooped over
the small drummer-boy that I told you about.  The poor little chap
was lying there, with his face a mass of bruises, and his eyes
closed; but he had shifted one leg an inch or two, and was still
breathing.  So my father pulled out a knife, and cut him free from
his drum--that was lashed on to him with a double turn of Manila
rope--and took him up and carried him along here to this very room
that we're sitting in.  He lost a good deal by this; for when he went
back to fetch the bundle he'd dropped, the preventive men had got
hold of it, and were thick as thieves along the foreshore; so that
'twas only by paying one or two to look the other way that he picked
up anything worth carrying off: which you'll allow to be hard, seeing
that he was the first man to give news of the wreck.

"Well, the inquiry was held, of course, and my father gave evidence,
and for the rest they had to trust to the sloop's papers, for not a
soul was saved besides the drummer-boy, and he was raving in a fever,
brought on by the cold and the fright.  And the seaman and the five
troopers gave evidence about the loss of the 'Despatch.'  The tall
trumpeter, too, whose ribs were healing, came forward and kissed the
book; but somehow his head had been hurt in coming ashore, and he
talked foolish-like, and 'twas easy seen he would never be a proper
man again.  The others were taken up to Plymouth, and so went their
ways; but the trumpeter stayed on in Coverack; and King George,
finding he was fit for nothing, sent him down a trifle of a pension
after a while--enough to keep him in board and lodging, with a bit of
tobacco over.

"Now the first time that this man--William Tallifer he called
himself--met with the drummer-boy, was about a fortnight after the
little chap had bettered enough to be allowed a short walk out of
doors, which he took, if you please, in full regimentals.  There
never was a soldier so proud of his dress.  His own suit had shrunk a
brave bit with the salt water; but into ordinary frock an' corduroys
he declared he would not get, not if he had to go naked the rest of
his life; so my father--being a good-natured man, and handy with the
needle--turned to and repaired damages with a piece or two of scarlet
cloth cut from the jacket of one of the drowned Marines.  Well, the
poor little chap chanced to be standing, in this rig out, down by the
gate of Gunner's Meadow, where they had buried two score and over of
his comrades.  The morning was a fine one, early in March month; and
along came the cracked trumpeter, likewise taking a stroll.

"'Hullo!' says he; 'good mornin'!  And what might you be doin' here?'

"'I was a-wishin',' says the boy, 'I had a pair o' drumsticks.  Our
lads were buried yonder without so much as a drum tapped or a musket
fired; and that's not Christian burial for British soldiers.'

"'Phut!' says the trumpeter, and spat on the ground; 'a parcel of
Marines!'

"The boy eyed him a second or so, and answered up: 'If I'd a tav of
turf handy, I'd bung it at your mouth, you greasy cavalryman, and
learn you to speak respectful of your betters.  The Marines are the
handiest body o' men in the service.'

"The trumpeter looked down on him from the height of six-foot two,
and asked: 'Did they die well?'

"'They died very well.  There was a lot of running to and fro at
first, and some of the men began to cry, and a few to strip off their
clothes.  But when the ship fell off for the last time, Captain Mein
turned and said something to Major Griffiths, the commanding officer
on board, and the Major called out to me to beat to quarters.  It
might have been for a wedding, he sang it out so cheerful.  We'd had
word already that 'twas to be parade order; and the men fell in as
trim and decent as if they were going to church.  One or two even
tried to shave at the last moment.  The Major wore his medals.  One
of the seamen, seeing I had work to keep the drum steady--the sling
being a bit loose for me, and the wind what you remember--lashed it
tight with a piece of rope; and that saved my life afterward, a drum
being as good as a cork until it's stove.  I kept beating away until
every man was on deck; and then the Major formed them up and told
them to die like British soldiers, and the chaplain was in the middle
of a prayer when she struck.  In ten minutes she was gone.  That was
how they died, cavalryman.'

"'And that was very well done, drummer of the Marines.  What's your
name?'

"'John Christian.'

"'Mine's William George Tallifer, trumpeter, of the Seventh Light
Dragoons--the Queen's Own.  I played "God Save the King" while our
men were drowning.  Captain Duncanfield told me to sound a call or
two, to put them in heart; but that matter of "God save the King" was
a notion of my own.  I won't say anything to hurt the feelings of a
Marine, even if he's not much over five-foot tall; but the Queen's
Own Hussars is a tearin' fine regiment.  As between horse and foot,
'tis a question o' which gets a chance.  All the way from Sahagun to
Corunna 'twas we that took and gave the knocks--at Mayorga and Rueda,
and Bennyventy.'--The reason, sir, I can speak the names so pat, is
that my father learnt 'em by heart afterward from the trumpeter, who
was always talking about Mayorga and Rueda and Bennyventy.'--We made
the rear-guard, under General Paget; and drove the French every time;
and all the infantry did was to sit about in wine-shops till we
whipped 'em out, an' steal an' straggle an' play the tom-fool in
general.  And when it came to a stand-up fight at Corunna, 'twas we
that had to stay seasick aboard the transports, an' watch the
infantry in the thick o' the caper.  Very well they behaved,
too--specially the Fourth Regiment, an' the Forty-Second Highlanders,
an' the Dirty Half-Hundred.  Oh, ay; they're decent regiments, all
three.  But the Queen's Own Hussars is a tearin' fine regiment.  So
you played on your drum when the ship was goin' down?  Drummer John
Christian, I'll have to get you a new pair of sticks.'

"The very next day the trumpeter marched into Helston, and got a
carpenter there to turn him a pair of box-wood drumsticks for the
boy.  And this was the beginning of one of the most curious
friendships you ever heard tell of.  Nothing delighted the pair more
than to borrow a boat off my father and pull out to the rocks where
the 'Primrose' and the 'Despatch' had struck and sunk; and on still
days 'twas pretty to hear them out there off the Manacles, the
drummer playing his tattoo--for they always took their music with
them--and the trumpeter practising calls, and making his trumpet
speak like an angel.  But if the weather turned roughish, they'd be
walking together and talking; leastwise the youngster listened while
the other discoursed about Sir John's campaign in Spain and Portugal,
telling how each little skirmish befell; and of Sir John himself, and
General Baird, and General Paget, and Colonel Vivian, his own
commanding officer, and what kind of men they were; and of the last
bloody stand-up at Corunna, and so forth, as if neither could have
enough.

"But all this had to come to an end in the late summer, for the boy,
John Christian, being now well and strong again, must go up to
Plymouth to report himself.  'Twas his own wish (for I believe King
George had forgotten all about him), but his friend wouldn't hold him
back.  As for the trumpeter, my father had made an arrangement to
take him on as lodger, as soon as the boy left; and on the morning
fixed for the start, he was up at the door here by five o'clock, with
his trumpet slung by his side, and all the rest of his belongings in
a small valise.  A Monday morning it was, and after breakfast he had
fixed to walk with the boy some way on the road toward Helston, where
the coach started.  My father left them at breakfast together, and
went out to meat the pig, and do a few odd morning jobs of that sort.
When he came back, the boy was still at table, and the trumpeter sat
with the rings in his hands, hitched together just as they be at this
moment.

"'Look at this,' he says to my father, showing him the lock.  'I
picked it up off a starving brass-worker in Lisbon, and it is not one
of your common locks that one word of six letters will open at any
time.  There's janius in this lock; for you've only to make the rings
spell any six-letter word you please and snap down the lock upon
that, and never a soul can open it--not the maker, even--until
somebody comes along that knows the word you snapped it on.  Now
Johnny here's goin', and he leaves his drum behind him; for, though
he can make pretty music on it, the parchment sags in wet weather, by
reason of the sea-water getting at it; an' if he carries it to
Plymouth, they'll only condemn it and give him another.  And, as for
me, I shan't have the heart to put lip to the trumpet any more when
Johnny's gone.  So we've chosen a word together, and locked 'em
together upon that; and, by your leave, I'll hang 'em here together
on the hook over your fireplace.  Maybe Johnny'll come back; maybe
not.  Maybe, if he comes, I'll be dead an' gone, and he'll take 'em
apart an' try their music for old sake's sake.  But if he never
comes, nobody can separate 'em; for nobody besides knows the word.
And if you marry and have sons, you can tell 'em that here are tied
together the souls of Johnny Christian, drummer of the Marines, and
William George Tallifer, once trumpeter of the Queen's Own Hussars.
Amen.'

"With that he hung the two instruments 'pon the hook there; and the
boy stood up and thanked my father and shook hands; and the pair went
out of the door, toward Helston.

"Somewhere on the road they took leave of one another; but nobody saw
the parting, nor heard what was said between them.  About three in
the afternoon the trumpeter came walking back over the hill; and by
the time my father came home from the fishing, the cottage was tidied
up, and the tea ready, and the whole place shining like a new pin.
From that time for five years he lodged here with my father, looking
after the house and tilling the garden.  And all the while he was
steadily failing; the hurt in his head spreading, in a manner, to his
limbs.  My father watched the feebleness growing on him, but said
nothing.  And from first to last neither spake a word about the
drummer, John Christian; nor did any letter reach them, nor word of
his doings.

"The rest of the tale you're free to believe, sir, or not, as you
please.  It stands upon my father's words, and he always declared he
was ready to kiss the Book upon it, before judge and jury.  He said,
too, that he never had the wit to make up such a yarn; and he defied
any one to explain about the lock, in particular, by any other tale.
But you shall judge for yourself.

"My father said that about three o'clock in the morning, April
fourteenth, of the year 'fourteen, he and William Tallifer were
sitting here, just as you and I, sir, are sitting now.  My father had
put on his clothes a few minutes before, and was mending his spiller
by the light of the horn lantern, meaning to set off before daylight
to haul the trammel.  The trumpeter hadn't been to bed at all.
Toward the last he mostly spent his nights (and his days, too) dozing
in the elbow-chair where you sit at this minute.  He was dozing then
(my father said) with his chin dropped forward on his chest, when a
knock sounded upon the door, and the door opened, and in walked an
upright young man in scarlet regimentals.

"He had grown a brave bit, and his face the color of wood-ashes; but
it was the drummer, John Christian.  Only his uniform was different
from the one he used to wear, and the figures '38' shone in brass
upon his collar.

"The drummer walked past my father as if he never saw him, and stood
by the elbow-chair and said:

"'Trumpeter, trumpeter, are you one with us?'

"And the trumpeter just lifted the lids of his eyes, and answered:
'How should I not be one with you, drummer Johnny--Johnny boy?  If
you come, I count; if you march, I mark time; until the discharge
comes.'

"'The discharge has come to-night,' said the drummer; 'and the word
is Corunna no longer.' And stepping to the chimney-place, he unhooked
the drum and trumpet, and began to twist the brass rings of the lock,
spelling the word aloud, so--'C-O-R-U-N-A.'  When he had fixed the
last letter, the padlock opened in his hand.

"'Did you know, trumpeter, that, when I came to Plymouth, they put me
into a line regiment?'

"'The 38th is a good regiment,' answered the old Hussar, still in his
dull voice; 'I went back with them from Sahagun to Corunna.  At
Corunna they stood in General Fraser's division, on the right.  They
behaved well."

"'But I'd fain see the Marines again,' says the drummer, handing him
the trumpet; 'and you, you shall call once more for the Queen's Own.
Matthew,' he says, suddenly, turning on my father--and when he
turned, my father saw for the first time that his scarlet jacket had
a round hole by the breast-bone, and that the blood was welling
there--'Matthew, we shall want your boat.'

"Then my father rose on his legs like a man in a dream, while they
two slung on, the one his drum, and t'other his trumpet.  He took the
lantern and went quaking before them down to the shore, and they
breathed heavily behind him; and they stepped into his boat, and my
father pushed off.

"'Row you first for Dolor Point,' says the drummer.  So my father
rowed them past the white houses of Coverack to Dolor Point, and
there, at a word, lay on his oars.  And the trumpeter, William
Tallifer, put his trumpet to his mouth and sounded the reveille.  The
music of it was like rivers running.

"'They will follow,' said the drummer.  'Matthew, pull you now for
the Manacles.'

"So my father pulled for the Manacles, and came to an easy close
outside Carn Du.  And the drummer took his sticks and beat a tattoo,
there by the edge of the reef; and the music of it was like a rolling
chariot.

"'That will do,' says he, breaking off; 'they will follow.  Pull now
for the shore under Gunner's Meadow.'

"Then my father pulled for the shore and ran his boat in under
Gunner's Meadow.  And they stepped out, all three, and walked up to
the meadow.  By the gate the drummer halted, and began his tattoo
again, looking out toward the darkness over the sea.

"And while the drum beat, and my father held his breath, there came
up out of the sea and the darkness a troop of many men, horse and
foot, and formed up among the graves; and others rose out of the
graves and formed up--drowned Marines with bleached faces, and pale
Hussars, riding their horses, all lean and shadowy.  There was no
clatter of hoofs or accoutrements, my father said, but a soft sound
all the while like the beating of a bird's wing; and a black shadow
lay like a pool about the feet of all.  The drummer stood upon a
little knoll just inside the gate, and beside him the tall trumpeter,
with hand on hip, watching them gather; and behind them both my
father, clinging to the gate.  When no more came, the drummer stopped
playing, and said, 'Call the roll.'

"Then the trumpeter stepped toward the end man of the rank and
called, 'Troop Sergeant-Major Thomas Irons,' and the man answered in
a thin voice, 'Here.'

"'Troop Sergeant-Major Thomas Irons, how is it with you?'

"The man answered, 'How should it be with me?  When I was young, I
betrayed a girl; and when I was grown, I betrayed a friend, and for
these I must pay.  But I died as a man ought.  God save the King!'

"The trumpeter called to the next man, 'Trooper Henry Buckingham,'
and the next man answered, 'Here.'

"'Trooper Henry Buckingham, how is it with you?'

"'How should it be with me?  I was a drunkard, and I stole, and in
Lugo, in a wine-shop, I killed a man.  But I died as a man should.
God save the King!'

"So the trumpeter went down the line; and when he had finished, the
drummer took it up, hailing the dead Marines in their order.  Each
man answered to his name, and each man ended with 'God save the
King!'  When all were hailed, the drummer stepped back to his mound,
and called:

"'It is well.  You are content, and we are content to join you.
Wait, now, a little while.'

"With this he turned and ordered my father to pick up the lantern,
and lead the way back.  As my father picked it up, he heard the ranks
of the dead men cheer and call, 'God save the King!' all together,
and saw them waver and fade back into the dark, like a breath fading
off a pane.

"But when they came back here to the kitchen, and my father set the
lantern down, it seemed they'd both forgot about him.  For the
drummer turned in the lantern-light--and my father could see the
blood still welling out of the hole in his breast--and took the
trumpet-sling from around the other's neck, and locked drum and
trumpet together again, choosing the letters on the lock very
carefully.  While he did this, he said:

"'The word is no more Corunna, but Bayonne.  As you left out an "n"
in Corunna, so must I leave out an "n" in Bayonne.' And before
snapping the padlock, he spelt out the word slowly--'B-A-Y-O-N-E.'
After that, he used no more speech; but turned and hung the two
instruments back on the hook; and then took the trumpeter by the arm;
and the pair walked out into the darkness, glancing neither to right
nor left.

"My father was on the point of following, when he heard a sort of
sigh behind him; and there, sitting in the elbow-chair, was the very
trumpeter he had just seen walk out by the door!  If my father's
heart jumped before, you may believe it jumped quicker now.  But
after a bit, he went up to the man asleep in the chair and put a hand
upon him.  It was the trumpeter in flesh and blood that he touched;
but though the flesh was warm, the trumpeter was dead.

"Well, sir, they buried him three days after; and at first my father
was minded to say nothing about his dream (as he thought it).  But
the day after the funeral, he met Parson Kendall coming from Helston
market; and the parson called out: 'Have 'ee heard the news the coach
brought down this mornin'?'  'What news?' says my father.  'Why, that
peace is agreed upon.'  'None too soon,' says my father.  'Not soon
enough for our poor lads at Bayonne,' the parson answered.
'Bayonne!' cries my father, with a jump.  'Why, yes;' and the parson
told him all about a great sally the French had made on the night of
April 13th.  'Do you happen to know if the 38th Regiment was
engaged?' my father asked.  'Come, now,' said Parson Kendall, 'I
didn't know you was so well up in the campaign.  But, as it happens,
I do know that the 38th was engaged, for 'twas they that held a
cottage and stopped the French advance.'

"Still my father held his tongue; and when, a week later, he walked
into Helston and bought a 'Mercury' off the Sherborne rider, and got
the landlord of the 'Angel' to spell out the list of killed and
wounded, sure enough, there among the killed was Drummer John
Christian, of the 38th Foot.

"After this there was nothing for a religious man but to make a clean
breast.  So my father went up to Parson Kendall, and told the whole
story.  The parson listened, and put a question or two, and then
asked:

"'Have you tried to open the lock since that night?'

"'I haven't dared to touch it,' says my father.

"'Then come along and try.'  When the parson came to the cottage
here, he took the things off the hook and tried the lock.  'Did he
say "Bayonne?"  The word has seven letters.'

"'Not if you spell it with one "n" as he did,' says my father.

"The parson spelt it out--'B-A-Y-O-N-E.'  'Whew!' says he, for the
lock had fallen open in his hand.

"He stood considering it a moment, and then he says: 'I tell you
what.  I shouldn't blab this all round the parish, if I was you.  You
won't get no credit for truth-telling, and a miracle's wasted on a
set of fools.  But if you like, I'll shut down the lock again upon a
holy word that no one but me shall know, and neither drummer nor
trumpeter, dead or alive, shall frighten the secret out of me.'

"'I wish to heaven you would, parson,' said my father.

"The parson chose the holy word there and then, and shut the lock
back upon it, and hung the drum and trumpet back in their place.  He
is gone long since, taking the word with him.  And till the lock is
broken by force, nobody will ever separate those two."




THE HOUSE AND THE BRAIN

BY LORD EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON

_Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer, Baron Lytton (born 1803, died
1873), was an extremely accomplished and versatile man.  He was a
statesman, orator, social reformer, playwright, poet, novelist (he
wrote more than fifty volumes of fiction), and short story writer.
In the latter capacity he produced a number of imaginative tales that
in their weird fantasy have been favorably compared with the work of
Edgar Allan Poe.  Of these the present story is the most noted._



THE HOUSE AND THE BRAIN

By LORD EDWARD BULWER-LYTTON

A friend of mine, who is a man of letters and a philosopher, said to
me one day, as if between jest and earnest: "Fancy! since we last
met, I have discovered a haunted house in the midst of London."

"Really haunted?--and by what?--ghosts?"

"Well, I can't answer that question; all I know is this: six weeks
ago my wife and I were in search of a furnished apartment.  Passing a
quiet street, we saw on the window of one of the houses a bill,
'Apartments, Furnished.'  The situation suited us: we entered the
house--liked the rooms--engaged them by the week--and left them the
third day.  No power on earth could have reconciled my wife to stay
longer; and I don't wonder at it."

"What did you see?"

"Excuse me--I have no desire to be ridiculed as a superstitious
dreamer--nor, on the other hand, could I ask you to accept on my
affirmation what you would hold to be incredible without the evidence
of your own senses.  Let me only say this, it was not so much what we
saw or heard (in which you might fairly suppose that we were the
dupes of our own excited fancy, or the victims of imposture in
others) that drove us away, as it was an undefinable terror which
seized both of us whenever we passed by the door of a certain
unfurnished room, in which we neither saw nor heard anything.  And
the strangest marvel of all was, that for once in my life I agreed
with my wife, silly woman though she be--and allowed, after the third
night, that it was impossible to stay a fourth in that house.
Accordingly, on the fourth morning I summoned the woman who kept the
house and attended on us, and told her that the rooms did not quite
suit us, and we would not stay out our week.  She said, dryly: 'I
know why; you have stayed longer than any other lodger.  Few ever
stayed a second night; none before you a third.  But I take it they
have been very kind to you."

"'They--who?' I asked, affecting to smile.

"'Why, they who haunt the house, whoever they are.  I don't mind
them; I remember them many years ago, when I lived in this house, not
as a servant; but I know they will be the death of me some day.  I
don't care--I'm old, and must die soon anyhow; and then I shall be
with them, and in this house still.'  The woman spoke with so dreary
a calmness that really it was a sort of awe that prevented my
conversing with her further.  I paid for my week, and too happy were
my wife and I to get off so cheaply."

"You excite my curiosity," said I; "nothing I should like better than
to sleep in a haunted house.  Pray give me the address of the one
which you left so ignominiously."

My friend gave me the address; and when we parted, I walked straight
toward the house thus indicated.

It is situated on the north side of Oxford Street, in a dull but
respectable thoroughfare.  I found the house shut up--no bill at the
window, and no response to my knock.  As I was turning away, a
beer-boy, collecting pewter pots at the neighboring areas, said to
me, "Do you want any one at that house, sir?"

"Yes, I heard it was to be let."

"Let!--why, the woman who kept it is dead--has been dead these three
weeks, and no one can be found to stay there, though Mr. J----
offered ever so much.  He offered mother, who chars for him, a pound
a week just to open and shut the windows, and she would not."

"Would not!--and why?"

"The house is haunted; and the old woman who kept it was found dead
in her bed, with her eyes wide open.  They say the devil strangled
her."

"Pooh!--you speak of Mr. J----.  Is he the owner of the house?"

"Yes."

"Where does he live?"

"In G---- Street, No. --."

"What is he?--in any business?"

"No, sir--nothing particular; a single gentleman."

I gave the pot-boy the gratuity earned by his liberal information,
and proceeded to Mr. J----, in G---- Street, which was close by the
street that boasted the haunted house.  I was lucky enough to find
Mr. J---- at home--an elderly man, with intelligent countenance and
prepossessing manners.

I communicated my name and my business frankly.  I said I heard the
house was considered to be haunted--that I had a strong desire to
examine a house with so equivocal a reputation--that I should be
greatly obliged if he would allow me to hire it, though only for a
night.  I was willing to pay for that privilege whatever he might be
inclined to ask.  "Sir," said Mr. J----, with great courtesy, "the
house is at your service, for as short or as long a time as you
please.  Rent is out of the question--the obligation will be on my
side should you be able to discover the cause of the strange
phenomena which at present deprive it of all value.  I can not let
it, for I can not even get a servant to keep it in order or answer
the door.  Unluckily the house is haunted, if I may use that
expression, not only by night, but by day; though at night the
disturbances are of a more unpleasant and sometimes of a more
alarming character.  The poor old woman who died in it three weeks
ago was a pauper whom I took out of a workhouse, for in her childhood
she had been known to some of my family, and had once been in such
good circumstances that she had rented that house of my uncle.  She
was a woman of superior education and strong mind, and was the only
person I could ever induce to remain in the house.  Indeed, since her
death, which was sudden, and the coroner's inquest, which gave it a
notoriety in the neighborhood, I have so despaired of finding any
person to take charge of the house, much more a tenant, that I would
willingly let it rent free for a year to any one who would pay its
rates and taxes."

"How long is it since the house acquired this sinister character?"

"That I can scarcely tell you, but very many years since.  The old
woman I spoke of said it was haunted when she rented it between
thirty and forty years ago.  The fact is, that my life has been spent
in the East Indies, and in the civil service of the Company.  I
returned to England last year, on inheriting the fortune of an uncle,
among whose possessions was the house in question.  I found it shut
up and uninhabited.  I was told that it was haunted, that no one
would inhabit it.  I smiled at what seemed to me so idle a story.  I
spent some money in repairing it--added to its old-fashioned
furniture a few modern articles--advertised it, and obtained a lodger
for a year.  He was a colonel on half-pay.  He came in with his
family, a son and a daughter, and four or five servants: they all
left the house the next day; and, although each of them declared that
he had seen something different from that which had scared the
others, a something still was equally terrible to all.  I really
could not in conscience sue, nor even blame, the colonel for breach
of agreement.  Then I put in the old woman I have spoken of, and she
was empowered to let the house in apartments.  I never had one lodger
who stayed more than three days.  I do not tell you their stories--to
no two lodgers have there been exactly the same phenomena repeated.
It is better that you should judge for yourself than enter the house
with an imagination influenced by previous narratives; only be
prepared to see and to hear something or other, and take whatever
precautions you yourself please."

"Have you never had a curiosity yourself to pass a night in that
house?"

"Yes.  I passed not a night, but three hours in broad daylight alone
in that house.  My curiosity is not satisfied, but it is quenched.  I
have no desire to renew the experiment.  You can not complain, you
see, sir, that I am not sufficiently candid; and unless your interest
be exceedingly eager and your nerves unusually strong, I honestly
add, that I advise you not to pass a night in that house."

"My interest is exceedingly keen," said I, "and though only a coward
will boast of his nerves in situations wholly unfamiliar to him, yet
my nerves have been seasoned in such variety of danger that I have
the right to rely on them--even in a haunted house."

Mr. J---- said very little more; he took the keys of the house out of
his bureau, gave them to me--and, thanking him cordially for his
frankness, and his urbane concession to my wish, I carried off my
prize.

Impatient for the experiment, as soon as I reached home, I summoned
my confidential servant--a young man of gay spirits, fearless temper,
and as free from superstitious prejudice as any one I could think of.

"F----," said I, "you remember in Germany how disappointed we were at
not finding a ghost in that old castle, which was said to be haunted
by a headless apparition?  Well, I have heard of a house in London
which, I have reason to hope, is decidedly haunted.  I mean to sleep
there to-night.  From what I hear, there is no doubt that something
will allow itself to be seen or to be heard--something, perhaps,
excessively horrible.  Do you think, if I take you with me, I may
rely on your presence of mind, whatever may happen?"

"Oh, sir! pray trust me," answered F----, grinning with delight.

"Very well; then here are the keys of the house--this is the address.
Go now--select for me any bedroom you please; and since the house has
not been inhabited for weeks, make up a good fire--air the bed
well--see, of course, that there are candles as well as fuel.  Take
with you my revolver and my dagger--so much for my weapons--arm
yourself equally well; and if we are not a match for a dozen ghosts,
we shall be but a sorry couple of Englishmen."

I was engaged for the rest of the day on business so urgent that had
not leisure to think much on the nocturnal adventure to which I had
plighted my honor.  I dined alone, and very late, and while dining,
read, as is my habit.  I selected one of the volumes of Macaulay's
essays.  I thought to myself that I would take the book with me;
there was so much of healthfulness in the style, and practical life
in the subjects, that it would serve as an antidote against the
influences of superstitious fancy.

Accordingly, about half-past nine, I put the book into my pocket, and
strolled leisurely toward the haunted house.  I took with me a
favorite dog--an exceedingly sharp, bold, and vigilant
bull-terrier--a dog fond of prowling about strange ghostly corners
and passages at night in search of rats--a dog of dogs for a ghost.

It was a summer night, but chilly, the sky somewhat gloomy and
overcast.  Still there was a moon--faint and sickly, but still a
moon--and, if the clouds permitted, after midnight it would be
brighter.

I reached the house, knocked, and my servant opened with a cheerful
smile.

"All right, sir, and very comfortable."

"Oh!" said I, rather disappointed; "have you not seen nor heard
anything remarkable?"

"Well, sir, I must own I have heard something queer."

"What?--what?"

"The sound of feet pattering behind me; and once or twice small
noises like whispers close at my ear--nothing more."

"You are not at all frightened?"

"I! not a bit of it, sir;" and the man's bold look reassured me on
one point--viz.: that happen what might, he would not desert me.

We were in the hall, the street-door closed, and my attention was now
drawn to my dog.  He had at first run in eagerly enough, but had
sneaked back to the door, and was scratching and whining to get out.
After patting him on the head, and encouraging him gently, the dog
seemed to reconcile himself to the situation, and followed me and
F---- through the house, but keeping close at my heels instead of
hurrying inquisitively in advance, which was his usual and normal
habit in all strange places.  We first visited the subterranean
apartments, the kitchen, and other offices, and especially the
cellars, in which last there were two or three bottles of wine still
left in a bin, covered with cobwebs, and evidently, by their
appearance, undisturbed for many years.  It was clear that the ghosts
were not wine-bibbers.  For the rest we discovered nothing of
interest.  There was a gloomy little back-yard, with very high walls.
The stones of this yard were very damp; and what with the damp, and
what with the dust and smoke-grime on the pavement, our feet left a
slight impression where we passed.  And now appeared the first
strange phenomenon witnessed by myself in this strange abode.  I saw,
just before me, the print of a foot suddenly form itself, as it were.
I stopped, caught hold of my servant, and pointed to it.  In advance
of that footprint as suddenly dropped another.  We both saw it.  I
advanced quickly to the place; the footprint kept advancing before
me, a small footprint--the foot of a child: the impression was too
faint thoroughly to distinguish the shape, but it seemed to us both
that it was the print of a naked foot.

This phenomenon ceased when we arrived at the opposite wall, nor did
it repeat itself on returning.  We remounted the stairs, and entered
the rooms on the ground floor, a dining-parlor, a small back-parlor,
and a still smaller third room that had been probably appropriated to
a footman--all still as death.  We then visited the drawing-rooms,
which seemed fresh and new.  In the front room I seated myself in an
armchair.  F---- placed on the table the candlestick with which he
had lighted us.  I told him to shut the door.  As he turned to do so,
a chair opposite to me moved from the wall quickly and noiselessly,
and dropped itself about a yard from my own chair, immediately
fronting it.

"Why, this is better than the turning-tables," said I, with a
half-laugh; and as I laughed, my dog put back his head and howled.

F----, coming back, had not observed the movement of the chair.  He
employed himself now in stilling the dog.  I continued to gaze on the
chair, and fancied I saw on it a pale blue misty outline of a human
figure, but an outline so indistinct that I could only distrust my
own vision.  The dog was now quiet.

"Put back that chair opposite to me," said I to F----; "put it back
to the wall."

F---- obeyed.  "Was that you, sir?" said he, turning abruptly.

"I!--what?"

"Why, something struck me.  I felt it sharply on the shoulder--just
here."

"No," said I.  "But we have jugglers present, and though we may not
discover their tricks, we shall catch them before they frighten us."

We did not stay long in the drawing-rooms--in fact, they felt so damp
and so chilly that I was glad to get to the fire upstairs.  We locked
the doors of the drawing-rooms--a precaution which, I should observe,
we had taken with all the rooms we had searched below.  The bedroom
my servant had selected for me was the best on the floor--a large
one, with two windows fronting the street.  The four-posted bed,
which took up no inconsiderable space, was opposite to the fire,
which burnt clear and bright; a door in the wall to the left, between
the bed and the window, communicated with the room which my servant
appropriated to himself.  This last was a small room with a sofa-bed,
and had no communication with the landing-place--no other door but
that which conducted to the bedroom I was to occupy.  On either side
of my fireplace was a cupboard, without locks, flush with the wall,
and covered with the same dull-brown paper.  We examined these
cupboards--only hooks to suspend female dresses--nothing else; we
sounded the walls--evidently solid--the outer walls of the building.
Having finished the survey of these apartments, warmed myself a few
moments, and lighted my cigar, I then, still accompanied by F----,
went forth to complete my reconnoitre.  In the landing-place there
was another door; it was closed firmly.  "Sir," said my servant, in
surprise, "I unlocked this door with all the others when I first
came; it can not have got locked from the inside, for--"

Before he had finished his sentence, the door, which neither of us
then was touching, opened quietly of itself.  We looked at each other
a single instant.  The same thought seized both--some human agency
might be detected here.  I rushed in first, my servant followed.  A
small blank dreary room without furniture--a few empty boxes and
hampers in a corner--a small window--the shutters closed--not even a
fireplace--no other door but that by which we had entered--no carpet
on the floor, and the floor seemed very old, uneven, worm-eaten,
mended here and there, as was shown by the whiter patches on the
wood; but no living being, and no visible place in which a living
being could have hidden.  As we stood gazing round, the door by which
we had entered closed as quietly as it had before opened: we were
imprisoned.

For the first time I felt a creep of undefinable horror.  Not so my
servant.  "Why, they don't think to trap us, sir; I could break that
trumpery door with a kick of my foot."

"Try first if it will open to your hand," said I, shaking off the
vague apprehension that had seized me, "while I unclose the shutters
and see what is without."

I unbarred the shutters--the window looked on the little back-yard I
have before described; there was no ledge without--nothing to break
the sheer descent of the wall.  No man getting out of that window
would have found any footing till he had fallen on the stones below.

F----, meanwhile, was vainly attempting to open the door.  He now
turned round to me and asked my permission to use force.  And I
should here state, in justice to the servant, that, far from evincing
any superstitious terrors, his nerve, composure, and even gaiety amid
circumstances so extraordinary, compelled my admiration, and made me
congratulate myself on having secured a companion in every way fitted
to the occasion.  I willingly gave him the permission he required.
But though he was a remarkably strong man, his force was as idle as
his milder efforts; the door did not even shake to his stoutest kick.
Breathless and panting, he desisted.  I then tried the door myself,
equally in vain.  As I ceased from the effort, again that creep of
horror came over me; but this time it was more cold and stubborn.  I
felt as if some strange and ghastly exhalation were rising up from
the chinks of that rugged floor, and filling the atmosphere with a
venomous influence hostile to human life.  The door now very slowly
and quietly opened as of its own accord.  We precipitated ourselves
into the landing-place.  We both saw a large pale light--as large as
the human figure, but shapeless and unsubstantial--move before us,
and ascend the stairs that led from the landing into the attic.  I
followed the light, and my servant followed me.  It entered to the
right of the landing, a small garret, of which the door stood open.
I entered in the same instant.  The light then collapsed into a small
globule, exceedingly brilliant and vivid: rested a moment on a bed in
the corner, quivered, and vanished.  We approached the bed and
examined it--a half-tester, such as is commonly found in attics
devoted to servants.  On the drawers that stood near it we perceived
an old faded silk kerchief, with the needle still left in a rent half
repaired.  The kerchief was covered with dust; probably it had
belonged to the old woman who had last died in that house, and this
might have been her sleeping-room.  I had sufficient curiosity to
open the drawers: there were a few odds and ends of female dress, and
two letters tied round with a narrow ribbon of faded yellow.  I took
the liberty to possess myself of the letters.  We found nothing else
in the room worth noticing--nor did the light reappear; but we
distinctly heard, as we turned to go, a pattering footfall on the
floor--just before us.  We went through the other attics (in all
four), the footfall still preceding us.  Nothing to be seen--nothing
but the footfall heard.  I had the letters in my hand: just as I was
descending the stairs I distinctly felt my wrist seized, and a faint
soft effort made to draw the letters from my clasp.  I only held them
the more tightly, and the effort ceased.

We regained the bed-chamber appropriated to myself, and I then
remarked that my dog had not followed us when we had left it.  He was
thrusting himself close to the fire, and trembling.  I was impatient
to examine the letters; and while I read them, my servant opened a
little box in which he had deposited the weapons I had ordered him to
bring; took them out, placed them on a table close at my bed-head,
and then occupied himself in soothing the dog, who, however, seemed
to heed him very little.

The letters were short--they were dated; the dates exactly
thirty-five years ago.  They were evidently from a lover to his
mistress, or a husband to some young wife.  Not only the terms of
expression, but a distinct reference to a former voyage, indicated
the writer to have been a seafarer.  The spelling and handwriting
were those of a man imperfectly educated, but still the language
itself was forcible.  In the expressions of endearment there was a
kind of rough wild love; but here and there were dark unintelligible
hints at some secret not of love--some secret that seemed of crime.
"We ought to love each other," was one of the sentences I remember,
"for how every one else would execrate us if all was known."  Again:
"Don't let any one be in the same room with you at night--you talk in
your sleep."  And again: "What's done can't be undone; and I tell you
there's nothing against us unless the dead could come to life."  Here
there was underlined in a better handwriting (a female's): "They do!"
At the end of the letter latest in date the same female hand had
written these words: "Lost at sea the 4th of June, the same day as--"

I put down the letters, and began to muse over their contents.

Fearing, however, that the train of thought into which I fell might
unsteady my nerves, I fully determined to keep my mind in a fit state
to cope with whatever of marvelous the advancing night might bring
forth.  I roused myself--laid the letters on the table--stirred up
the fire, which was still bright and cheering, and opened my volume
of Macaulay.  I read quietly enough till about half-past eleven.  I
then threw myself dressed upon the bed, and told my servant he might
retire to his own room, but must keep himself awake.  I bade him
leave open the door between the two rooms.  Thus alone, I kept two
candles burning on the table by my bed-head.  I placed my watch
beside the weapons, and calmly resumed my Macaulay.  Opposite to me
the fire burned clear; and on the hearth-rug, seemingly asleep, lay
the dog.  In about twenty minutes I felt an exceedingly cold air pass
by my cheek, like a sudden draft.  I fancied the door to my right,
communicating with the landing-place, must have got open; but no--it
was closed.  I then turned my glance to my left, and saw the flame of
the candles violently swayed as by a wind.  At the same moment the
watch beside the revolver softly slid from the table--softly,
softly--no visible hand--it was gone.  I sprang up, seizing the
revolver with the one hand, the dagger with the other: I was not
willing that my weapons should share the fate of the watch.  Thus
armed, I looked round the floor--no sign of the watch.  Three slow,
loud, distinct knocks were now heard at the bed-head; my servant
called out: "Is that you, sir?"

"No; be on your guard."

The dog now roused himself and sat on his haunches, his ears moving
quickly backward and forward.  He kept his eyes fixed on me with a
look so strange that he concentred all my attention on himself.
Slowly, he rose up, all his hair bristling, and stood perfectly
rigid, and with the same wild stare.  I had no time, however, to
examine the dog.  Presently my servant emerged from his room; and if
ever I saw horror in the human face, it was then.  I should not have
recognized him had we met in the street, so altered was every
lineament.  He passed by me quickly, saying in a whisper that seemed
scarcely to come from his lips: "Run--run! it is after me!"  He
gained the door to the landing, pulled it open, and rushed forth.  I
followed him into the landing involuntarily, calling him to stop;
but, without heeding me, he bounded down the stairs, clinging to the
balusters, and taking several steps at a time.  I heard, where I
stood, the street-door open--heard it again clap to.  I was left
alone in the haunted house.

It was but for a moment that I remained undecided whether or not to
follow my servant; pride and curiosity alike forbade so dastardly a
flight.  I reentered my room, closing the door after me, and
proceeded cautiously into the interior chamber.  I encountered
nothing to justify my servant's terror.  I again carefully examined
the walls, to see if there were any concealed door.  I could find no
trace of one--not even a seam in the dull-brown paper with which the
room was hung.  How, then, had the Thing, whatever it was, which had
so scared him, obtained ingress except through my own chamber?

I returned to my room, shut and locked the door that opened upon the
interior one, and stood on the hearth, expectant and prepared.  I now
perceived that the dog had slunk into an angle of the wall, and was
pressing himself close against it, as if literally striving to force
his way into it.  I approached the animal and spoke to it; the poor
brute was evidently beside itself with terror.  It showed all its
teeth, the slaver dropping from its jaws, and would certainly have
bitten me if I had touched it.  It did not seem to recognize me.
Whoever has seen at the Zoological Gardens a rabbit, fascinated by a
serpent, cowering in a corner, may form some idea of the anguish
which the dog exhibited.  Finding all efforts to soothe the animal in
vain, and fearing that his bite might be as venomous in that state as
in the madness of hydrophobia, I left him alone, placed my weapons on
the table beside the fire, seated myself, and recommenced my Macaulay.

Perhaps, in order not to appear seeking credit for a courage, or
rather a coolness, which the reader may conceive I exaggerate, I may
be pardoned if I pause to indulge in one or two egotistical remarks.

As I hold presence of mind, or what is called courage, to be
precisely proportioned to familiarity with the circumstances that
lead to it, so I should say that I had been long sufficiently
familiar with all experiments that appertain to the Marvelous.  I had
witnessed many very extraordinary phenomena in various parts of the
world--phenomena that would be either totally disbelieved if I stated
them, or ascribed to supernatural agencies.  Now, my theory is that
the Supernatural is the Impossible, and that what is called
supernatural is only a something in the laws of nature of which we
have been hitherto ignorant.  Therefore, if a ghost rise before me, I
have not the right to say, "So, then, the supernatural is possible,"
but rather, "So, then, the apparition of a ghost is, contrary to
received opinion, within the laws of nature--i.e., not supernatural."

Now, in all that I had hitherto witnessed, and indeed in all the
wonders which the amateurs of mystery in our age record as facts, a
material living agency is always required.  On the Continent you will
find still magicians who assert that they can raise spirits.  Assume
for the moment that they assert truly, still the living material form
of the magician is present; and he is the material agency by which,
from some constitutional peculiarities, certain strange phenomena are
represented to your natural senses.

Accept, again, as truthful, the tales of Spirit Manifestation in
America--musical or other sounds--writings on paper, produced by no
discernible hand--articles of furniture moved without apparent human
agency--or the actual sight and touch of hands, to which no bodies
seem to belong--still there must be found the Medium, or living being
with constitutional peculiarities capable of obtaining these signs.
In fine, in all such marvels, supposing even that there is no
imposture, there must be a human being like ourselves by whom, or
through whom, the effects presented to human beings are produced.  It
is so with the now familiar phenomena of mesmerism or
electro-biology; the mind of the person operated on is affected
through a material living agent.  Nor, supposing it true that a
mesmerized patient can respond to the will or passes of a mesmerizer
a hundred miles distant, is the response less occasioned by a
material being; it may be through a material fluid--call it Electric,
call it Odic, call it what you will--which has the power of
traversing space and passing obstacles that the material effect is
communicated from one to the other.  Hence all that I had hitherto
witnessed, or expected to witness, in this strange house, I believed
to be occasioned through some agency or medium as mortal as myself;
and this idea necessarily prevented the awe with which those who
regard as supernatural things that are not within the ordinary
operations of nature might have been impressed by the adventures of
that memorable night.

As, then, it was my conjecture that all that was presented, or would
be presented, to my senses must originate in some human being gifted
by constitution with the power so to present them, and having some
motive so to do, I felt an interest in my theory which, in its way,
was rather philosophical than superstitious.  And I can sincerely say
that I was in as tranquil a temper for observation as any practical
experimentalist could be in awaiting the effects of some rare, though
perhaps perilous, chemical combination.  Of course, the more I kept
my mind detached from fancy, the more the temper fitted for
observation would be obtained; and I therefore riveted eye and
thought on the strong daylight sense in the page of my Macaulay.

I now became aware that something interposed between the page and the
light--the page was overshadowed: I looked up, and I saw what I shall
find it very difficult, perhaps impossible, to describe.

It was a darkness shaping itself forth from the air in very undefined
outline.  I can not say it was of a human form, and yet it had more
resemblance to a human form, or rather shadow, than to anything else.
As it stood, wholly apart and distinct from the air and the light
around it, its dimensions seemed gigantic, the summit nearly touching
the ceiling.  While I gazed, a feeling of intense cold seized me.  An
iceberg before me could not more have chilled me; nor could the cold
of an iceberg have been more purely physical.  I feel convinced that
it was not the cold caused by fear.  As I continued to gaze, I
thought--but this I can not say with precision--that I distinguished
two eyes looking down on me from the height.  One moment I fancied
that I distinguished them clearly, the next they seemed gone; but
still two rays of a pale-blue light frequently shot through the
darkness, as from the height on which I half believed, half doubted,
that I had encountered the eyes.

I strove to speak--my voice utterly failed me; I could only think to
myself: "Is this fear? it is not fear!"  I strove to rise--in vain; I
felt as if weighed down by an irresistible force.  Indeed, my
impression was that of an immense and overwhelming power opposed to
my volition--that sense of utter inadequacy to cope with a force
beyond man's, which one may feel physically in a storm at sea, in a
conflagration, or when confronting some terrible wild beast, or
rather, perhaps, the shark of the ocean, I felt morally.  Opposed to
my will was another will, as far superior to its strength as storm,
fire, and shark are superior in material force to the force of man.

And now, as this impression grew on me--now came, at last,
horror--horror to a degree that no words can convey.  Still I
retained pride, if not courage; and in my own mind I said: "This is
horror, but it is not fear; unless I fear I can not be harmed; my
reason rejects this thing; it is an illusion--I do not fear."  With a
violent effort I succeeded at last in stretching out my hand toward
the weapon on the table: as I did so, on the arm and shoulder I
received a strange shock, and my arm fell to my side powerless.  And
now, to add to my horror, the light began slowly to wane from the
candles--they were not, as it were, extinguished, but their flame
seemed very gradually withdrawn: it was the same with the fire--the
light was extracted from the fuel; in a few minutes the room was in
utter darkness.  The dread that came over me, to be thus in the dark
with that dark Thing, whose power was so intensely felt, brought a
reaction of nerve.  In fact, terror had reached that climax, that
either my senses must have deserted me, or I must have burst through
the spell.  I did burst through it.  I found voice, though the voice
was a shriek.  I remembered that I broke forth with words like these:
"I do not fear, my soul does not fear;" and at the same time I found
strength to rise.  Still in that profound gloom I rushed to one of
the windows--tore aside the curtain--flung open the shutters; my
first thought was--Light.  And when I saw the moon high, clear, and
calm, I felt a joy that almost compensated for the previous terror.
There was the moon, there was also the light from the gas-lamps in
the deserted slumberous street.  I turned to look back into the room;
the moon penetrated its shadow very palely and partially--but still
there was light.  The dark Thing, whatever it might be, was
gone--except that I could yet see a dim shadow, which seemed the
shadow of that shade, against the opposite wall.

My eye now rested on the table, and from under the table (which was
without cloth or cover--an old mahogany round table) there rose a
hand, visible as far as the wrist.  It was a hand, seemingly, as much
of flesh and blood as my own, but the hand of an aged person--lean,
wrinkled, small too--a woman's hand.  That hand very softly closed on
the two letters that lay on the table: hand and letters both
vanished.  There then came the same three loud measured knocks I had
heard at the bed-head before this extraordinary drama had commenced.

As those sounds slowly ceased, I felt the whole room vibrate
sensibly; and at the far end there rose, as from the floor, sparks or
globules like bubbles of light, many colored--green, yellow,
fire-red, azure.  Up and down, to and fro, hither, thither, as tiny
Will-o'-the-Wisps, the sparks moved, slow or swift, each at its own
caprice.  A chair (as in the drawing-room below) was now advanced
from the wall without apparent agency, and placed at the opposite
side of the table.  Suddenly, as forth from the chair, there grew a
shape--a woman's shape.  It was distinct as a shape of life--ghastly
as a shape of death.  The face was that of youth, with a strange
mournful beauty; the throat and shoulders were bare, the rest of the
form in a loose robe of cloudy white.  It began sleeking its long
yellow hair, which fell over its shoulders; its eyes were not turned
toward me, but to the door; it seemed listening, watching, waiting.
The shadow of the shade in the background grew darker; and again I
thought I beheld the eyes gleaming out from the summit of the
shadow--eyes fixed upon that shape.

As if from the door, though it did not open, there grew out another
shape, equally distinct, equally ghastly--a man's shape--a young
man's.  It was in the dress of the last century, or rather in a
likeness of such dress (for both the male shape and the female,
though defined, were evidently unsubstantial,
impalpable--simulacra--phantasms); and there was something
incongruous, grotesque, yet fearful, in the contrast between the
elaborate finery, the courtly precision of that old-fashioned garb,
with its ruffles and lace and buckles, and the corpse-like stillness
of the flitting wearer.  Just as the male shape approached the
female, the dark Shadow started from the wall, all three for a moment
wrapped in darkness.  When the pale light returned, the two phantoms
were as if in the grasp of the Shadow that towered between them; and
there was a blood-stain on the breast of the female; and the phantom
male was leaning on its phantom sword, and blood seemed trickling
fast from the ruffles, from the lace; and the darkness of the
intermediate Shadow swallowed them up--they were gone.  And again the
bubbles of light shot, and sailed, and undulated, growing thicker and
thicker and more wildly confused in their movements.

The closet door to the right of the fireplace now opened, and from
the aperture there came the form of an aged woman.  In her hand she
held letters--the very letters over which I had seen the Hand close;
and behind her I heard a footstep.  She turned round as if to listen,
and then she opened the letters and seemed to read; and over her
shoulder I saw a livid face, the face as of a man long
drowned--bloated, bleached--seaweed tangled in its dripping hair; and
at her feet lay a form as of a corpse, and beside the corpse there
cowered a child, a miserable squalid child, with famine in its cheeks
and fear in its eyes.  And as I looked in the old woman's face, the
wrinkles and lines vanished, and it became a face of
youth--hard-eyed, stony, but still youth; and the Shadow darted
forth, and darkened over these phantoms as it had darkened over the
last.

Nothing now was left but the Shadow, and on that my eyes were
intently fixed, till again eyes grew out of the Shadow--malignant,
serpent eyes.  And the bubbles of light again rose and fell, and in
their disordered, irregular, turbulent maze, mingled with the wan
moonlight.  And now from these globules themselves, as from the shell
of an egg, monstrous things burst out; the air grew filled with them;
larv√¶ so bloodless and so hideous that I can in no way describe them
except to remind the reader of the swarming life which the solar
microscope brings before his eyes in a drop of water--things
transparent, supple, agile, chasing each other, devouring each
other--forms like naught ever beheld by the naked eye.  As the shapes
were without symmetry, so their movements were without order.  In
their very vagrancies there was no sport; they came round me and
round, thicker and faster and swifter, swarming over my head,
crawling over my right arm, which was outstretched in involuntary
command against all evil beings.  Sometimes I felt myself touched,
but not by them; invisible hands touched me.  Once I felt the clutch
as of cold soft fingers at my throat.  I was still equally conscious
that if I gave way to fear I should be in bodily peril; and I
concentred all my faculties in the single focus of resisting,
stubborn will.  And I turned my sight from the Shadow--above all,
from those strange serpent eyes--eyes that had now become distinctly
visible.  For there, though in naught else around me, I was aware
that there was a WILL, and a will of intense, creative, working evil,
which might crush down my own.

The pale atmosphere in the room began now to redden as if in the air
of some near conflagration.  The larv√¶ grew lurid as things that live
in fire.  Again the room vibrated; again were heard the three
measured knocks; and again all things were swallowed up in the
darkness of the dark Shadow, as if out of that darkness all had come,
into that darkness all returned.

As the gloom receded, the Shadow was wholly gone.  Slowly, as it had
been withdrawn, the flame grew again into the candles on the table,
again into the fuel in the grate.  The whole room came once more
calmly, healthfully into sight.

The two doors were still closed, the door communicating with the
servant's room still locked.  In the corner of the wall, into which
he had so convulsively niched himself, lay the dog.  I called to
him--no movement; I approached--the animal was dead; his eyes
protruded; his tongue out of his mouth; the froth gathered round his
jaws.  I took him in my arms; I brought him to the fire; I felt acute
grief for the loss of my poor favorite--acute self-reproach; I
accused myself of his death; I imagined he had died of fright.  But
what was my surprise on finding that his neck was actually broken.
Had this been done in the dark?--must it not have been by a hand
human as mine?--must there not have been a human agency all the while
in that room?  Good cause to suspect it.  I can not tell.  I can not
do more than state the fact fairly; the reader may draw his own
inference.

Another surprising circumstance--my watch was restored to the table
from which it had been so mysteriously withdrawn; but it had stopped
at the very moment it was so withdrawn; nor, despite all the skill of
the watchmaker, has it ever gone since--that is, it will go in a
strange erratic way for a few hours, and then come to a dead stop--it
is worthless.


Nothing more chanced for the rest of the night.  Nor, indeed, had I
long to wait before the dawn broke.  Nor till it was broad daylight
did I quit the haunted house.  Before I did so, I revisited the
little blind room in which my servant and myself had been for a time
imprisoned.  I had a strong impression--for which I could not
account--that from that room had originated the mechanism of the
phenomena--if I may use the term--which had been experienced in my
chamber.  And though I entered it now in the clear day, with the sun
peering through the filmy window, I still felt, as I stood on its
floors, the creep of the horror which I had first there experienced
the night before, and which had been so aggravated by what had passed
in my own chamber.  I could not, indeed, bear to stay more than half
a minute within those walls.  I descended the stairs, and again I
heard the footfall before me; and when I opened the street door, I
thought I could distinguish a very low laugh.  I gained my own house,
expecting to find my runaway servant there.  But he had not presented
himself, nor did I hear more of him for three days, when I received a
letter from him, dated from Liverpool to this effect:


"Honored Sir--I humbly entreat your pardon, though I can scarcely
hope that you will think that I deserve it, unless--which Heaven
forbid!--you saw what I did.  I feel that it will be years before I
can recover myself; and as to being fit for service, it is out of the
question.  I am therefore going to my brother-in-law at Melbourne.
The ship sails to-morrow.  Perhaps the long voyage may set me up.  I
do nothing now but start and tremble, and fancy It is behind me.  I
humbly beg you, honored sir, to order my clothes, and whatever wages
are due to me, to be sent to my mother's, at Walworth--John knows her
address."


The letter ended with additional apologies, somewhat incoherent, and
explanatory details as to effects that had been under the writer's
charge.

This flight may perhaps warrant a suspicion that the man wished to go
to Australia, and had been somehow or other fraudulently mixed up
with the events of the night.  I say nothing in refutation of that
conjecture; rather, I suggest it as one that would seem to many
persons the most probable solution of improbable occurrences.  My
belief in my own theory remained unshaken.  I returned in the evening
to the house, to bring away in a hack cab the things I had left
there, with my poor dog's body.  In this task I was not disturbed,
nor did any incident worth note befall me, except that still, on
ascending and descending the stairs, I heard the same footfall in
advance.  On leaving the house, I went to Mr. J----'s.  He was at
home.  I returned him the keys, told him that my curiosity was
sufficiently gratified, and was about to relate quickly what had
passed, when he stopped me, and said, though with much politeness,
that he had no longer any interest in a mystery which none had ever
solved.

I determined at least to tell him of the two letters I had read, as
well as of the extraordinary manner in which they had disappeared,
and I then inquired if he thought they had been addressed to the
woman who had died in the house, and if there were anything in her
early history which could possibly confirm the dark suspicions to
which the letters gave rise.  Mr. J---- seemed startled, and, after
musing a few moments, answered: "I am but little acquainted with the
woman's earlier history, except, as I before told you, that her
family were known to mine.  But you revive some vague reminiscences
to her prejudice.  I will make inquiries, and inform you of their
result.  Still, even if we could admit the popular superstition that
a person who had been either the perpetrator or the victim of dark
crimes in life could revisit, as a restless spirit, the scene in
which those crimes had been committed, I should observe that the
house was infested by strange sights and sounds before the old woman
died--you smile--what would you say?"

"I would say this, that I am convinced, if we could get to the bottom
of these mysteries, we should find a living human agency."

"What!  you believe it is all an imposture? for what object?"

"Not an imposture in the ordinary sense of the word.  If suddenly I
were to sink into a deep sleep, from which you could not awake me,
but in that sleep could answer questions with an accuracy which I
could not pretend to when awake--tell you what money you had in your
pocket--nay, describe your very thoughts--it is not necessarily an
imposture, any more than it is necessarily supernatural.  I should
be, unconsciously to myself, under a mesmeric influence, conveyed to
me from a distance by a human being who had acquired power over me by
previous rapport."

"But if a mesmerizer could so affect another living being, can you
suppose that a mesmerizer could also affect inanimate objects; move
chairs--open and shut doors?"

"Or impress our senses with the belief in such effects--we never
having been _en rapport_ with the person acting on us?  No.  What is
commonly called mesmerism could not do this; but there may be a power
akin to mesmerism and superior to it--the power that in the old days
was called Magic.  That such a power may extend to all inanimate
objects of matter, I do not say; but if so, it would not be against
nature--it would only be a rare power in nature which might be given
to constitutions with certain peculiarities, and cultivated by
practise to an extraordinary degree.  That such a power might extend
over the dead--that is, over certain thoughts and memories that the
dead may still retain--and compel, not that which ought properly to
be called the Soul, and which is far beyond human reach, but rather a
phantom of what has been most earth-stained on earth to make itself
apparent to our senses--is a very ancient though obsolete theory,
upon which I will hazard no opinion.  But I do not conceive the power
would be supernatural.  Let me illustrate what I mean from an
experiment which Paracelsus describes as not difficult, and which the
author of the 'Curiosities of Literature' cites as credible: A flower
perishes; you burn it.  Whatever were the elements of that flower
while it lived are gone, dispersed, you know not whither; you can
never discover nor re-collect them.  But you can, by chemistry, out
of the burned dust of that flower, raise a spectrum of the flower,
just as it seemed in life.  It may be the same with the human being.
The soul has as much escaped you as the essence or elements of the
flower.  Still you may make a spectrum of it.  And this phantom,
though in the popular superstition it is held to be the soul of the
departed, must not be confounded with the true soul; it is but the
_eidolon_ of the dead form.  Hence, like the best attested stories of
ghosts or spirits, the thing that most strikes us is the absence of
what we hold to be the soul; that is, of superior emancipated
intelligence.  These apparitions come for little or no object--they
seldom speak when they do come; if they speak, they utter no ideas
above those of an ordinary person on earth.  American spirit-seers
have published volumes of communications, in prose and verse, which
they assert to be given in the names of the most illustrious
dead--Shakespeare, Bacon--heaven knows whom.  Those communications,
taking the best, are certainly not a whit of higher order than would
be communications from living persons of fair talent and education;
they are wondrously inferior to what Bacon, Shakespeare, and Plato
said and wrote when on earth.  Nor, what is more noticeable, do they
ever contain an idea that was not on the earth before.  Wonderful,
therefore, as such phenomena may be (granting them to be truthful), I
see much that philosophy may question, nothing that it is incumbent
on philosophy to deny--viz., nothing supernatural.  They are but
ideas conveyed somehow or other (we have not yet discovered the
means) from one mortal brain to another.  Whether, in so doing,
tables walk of their own accord, or fiendlike shapes appear in a
magic circle, or bodyless hands rise and remove material objects, or
a Thing of Darkness, such as presented itself to me, freeze our
blood--still am I persuaded that these are but agencies conveyed, as
by electric wires, to my own brain from the brain of another.  In
some constitutions there is a natural chemistry, and those
constitutions may produce chemic wonders--in others a natural fluid,
call it electricity, and these may produce electric wonders.  But the
wonders differ from Natural Science in this--they are alike
objectless, purposeless, puerile, frivolous.  They lead on to no
grand results; and therefore the world does not heed, and true sages
have not cultivated them.  But sure I am, that of all I saw or heard,
a man, human as myself, was the remote originator; and I believe
unconsciously to himself as to the exact effects produced, for this
reason: no two persons, you say, have ever told you that they
experienced exactly the same thing.  Well, observe, no two persons
ever experience exactly the same dream.  If this were an ordinary
imposture, the machinery would be arranged for results that would but
little vary; if it were a supernatural agency permitted by the
Almighty, it would surely be for some definite end.  These phenomena
belong to neither class; my persuasion is that they originate in some
brain now far distant; that that brain had no distinct volition in
anything that occurred; that what does occur reflects but its
devious, motley, ever-shifting, half-formed thoughts; in short, that
it has been but the dreams of such a brain put into action and
invested with a semi-substance.  That this brain is of immense power,
that it can set matter into movement, that it is malignant and
destructive, I believe; some material force must have killed my dog;
the same force might, for aught I know, have sufficed to kill myself,
had I been as subjugated by terror as the dog--had my intellect or my
spirit given me no countervailing resistance in my will."

"It killed your dog! that is fearful! indeed it is strange that no
animal can be induced to stay in that house; not even a cat.  Rats
and mice are never found in it."

"The instincts of the brute creation detect influences deadly to
their existence.  Man's reason has a sense less subtle, because it
has a resisting power more supreme.  But enough; do you comprehend my
theory?"

"Yes, though imperfectly--and I accept any crotchet (pardon the
word), however odd, rather than embrace at once the notion of ghosts
and hobgoblins we imbibed in our nurseries.  Still, to my unfortunate
house the evil is the same.  What on earth can I do with the house?"

"I will tell you what I would do.  I am convinced from my own
internal feelings that the small unfurnished room at right angles to
the door of the bedroom which I occupied forms a starting-point or
receptacle for the influences which haunt the house; and I strongly
advise you to have the walls opened, the floor removed--nay, the
whole room pulled down.  I observe that it is detached from the body
of the house, built over the small back-yard, and could be removed
without injury to the rest of the building."

"And you think, if I did that--"

"You would cut off the telegraph wires.  Try it.  I am so persuaded
that I am right that I will pay half the expense if you will allow me
to direct the operations."

"Nay, I am well able to afford the cost; for the rest, allow me to
write to you."

About ten days after I received a letter from Mr. J----, telling me
that he had visited the house since I had seen him; that he had found
the two letters I had described, replaced in the drawer from which I
had taken them; that he had read them with misgivings like my own;
that he had instituted a cautious inquiry about the woman to whom I
rightly conjectured they had been written.  It seemed that thirty-six
years ago (a year before the date of the letters) she had married,
against the wish of her relations, an American of very suspicious
character; in fact, he was generally believed to have been a pirate.
She herself was the daughter of very respectable tradespeople, and
had served in the capacity of a nursery governess before her
marriage.  She had a brother, a widower, who was considered wealthy,
and who had one child of about six years old.  A month after the
marriage, the body of this brother was found in the Thames, near
London Bridge; there seemed some marks of violence about his throat,
but they were not deemed sufficient to warrant the inquest in any
other verdict than that of "found drowned."

The American and his wife took charge of the little boy, the deceased
brother having by his will left his sister the guardianship of his
only child--and in event of the child's death, the sister inherited.
The child died about six months afterward--it was supposed to have
been neglected and ill-treated.  The neighbors deposed to having
heard it shriek at night.  The surgeon who had examined it after
death said that it was emaciated as if from want of nourishment, and
the body was covered with livid bruises.  It seemed that one winter
night the child had sought to escape--crept out into the
back-yard--tried to scale the wall--fallen back exhausted, and been
found at morning on the stones in a dying state.  But though there
was some evidence of cruelty, there was none of murder; and the aunt
and her husband had sought to palliate cruelty by alleging the
exceeding stubbornness and perversity of the child, who was declared
to be half-witted.  Be that as it may, at the orphan's death the aunt
inherited her brother's fortune.  Before the first wedded year was
out, the American quitted England abruptly, and never returned to it.
He obtained a cruising vessel, which was lost in the Atlantic two
years afterward.  The widow was left in affluence; but reverses of
various kinds had befallen her: a bank broke--an investment
failed--she went into a small business and became insolvent--then she
entered into service, sinking lower and lower, from housekeeper down
to maid-of-all-work--never long retaining a place, though nothing
decided against her character was ever alleged.  She was considered
sober, honest, and peculiarly quiet in her ways; still nothing
prospered with her.  And so she had dropped into the workhouse, from
which Mr. J---- had taken her, to be placed in charge of the very
house which she had rented as mistress in the first year of her
wedded life.

Mr. J---- added that he had passed an hour alone in the unfurnished
room which I had urged him to destroy, and that his impressions of
dread while there were so great, though he had neither heard nor seen
anything, that he was eager to have the walls bared and the floors
removed as I had suggested.  He had engaged persons for the work, and
would commence any day I would name.

The day was accordingly fixed.  I repaired to the haunted house--we
went into the blind dreary room, took up the skirting, and then the
floors.  Under the rafters, covered with rubbish, was found a
trap-door, quite large enough to admit a man.  It was closely nailed
down, with clamps and rivets of iron.  On removing these we descended
into a room below, the existence of which had never been suspected.
In this room there had been a window and a flue, but they had been
bricked over, evidently for many years.  By the help of candles we
examined this place; it still retained some moldering
furniture--three chairs, an oak settle, a table--all of the fashion
of about eighty years ago.  There was a chest of drawers against the
wall, in which we found, half-rotted away, old-fashioned articles of
a man's dress, such as might have been worn eighty or a hundred years
ago by a gentleman of some rank--costly steel buckles and buttons,
like those yet worn in court-dresses, a handsome court sword--in a
waistcoat which had once been rich with gold-lace, but which was now
blackened and foul with damp, we found five guineas, a few silver
coins, and an ivory ticket, probably for some place of entertainment
long since passed away.  But our main discovery was in a kind of iron
safe fixed to the wall, the lock of which it cost us much trouble to
get picked.

In this safe were three shelves, and two small drawers.  Ranged on
the shelves were several small bottles of crystal, hermetically
stoppered.  They contained colorless volatile essences, of the nature
of which I shall only say that they were not poisonous--phosphor and
ammonia entered into some of them.  There were also some very curious
glass tubes, and a small pointed rod of iron, with a large lump of
rock-crystal, and another of amber--also a loadstone of great power.

In one of the drawers we found a miniature portrait set in gold, and
retaining the freshness of its colors most remarkably, considering
the length of time it had probably been there.  The portrait was that
of a man who might be somewhat advanced in middle life, perhaps
forty-seven or forty-eight.

It was a remarkable face--a most impressive face.  If you could fancy
some mighty serpent transformed into man, preserving in the human
lineaments the old serpent type, you would have a better idea of that
countenance than long descriptions can convey: the width and flatness
of frontal--the tapering elegance of contour disguising the strength
of the deadly jaw--the long, large, terrible eye, glittering and
green as the emerald--and withal a certain ruthless calm, as if from
the consciousness of an immense power.

Mechanically I turned round the miniature to examine the back of it,
and on the back was engraved a pentacle; in the middle of the
pentacle a ladder, and the third step of the ladder was formed by the
date 1765.  Examining still more minutely, I detected a spring; this,
on being pressed, opened the back of the miniature as a lid.
Withinside the lid was engraved, "Marianna to thee--Be faithful in
life and in death to ----."  Here follows a name that I will not
mention, but it was not unfamiliar to me.  I had heard it spoken of
by old men in my childhood as the name borne by a dazzling charlatan
who had made a great sensation in London for a year or so, and had
fled the country on the charge of a double murder within his own
house--that of his mistress and his rival.  I said nothing of this to
Mr. J----, to whom reluctantly I resigned the miniature.

We had found no difficulty in opening the first drawer within the
iron safe; we found great difficulty in opening the second: it was
not locked, but it resisted all efforts, till we inserted in the
chinks the edge of a chisel.  When we had thus drawn it forth, we
found a very singular apparatus in the nicest order.  Upon a small
thin book, or rather tablet, was placed a saucer of crystal; this
saucer was filled with a clear liquid--on that liquid floated a kind
of compass, with a needle shifting rapidly round; but instead of the
usual points of a compass were seven strange characters, not very
unlike those used by astrologers to denote the planets.  A peculiar
but not strong nor displeasing odor came from this drawer, which was
lined with a wood that we afterward discovered to be hazel.  Whatever
the cause of this odor, it produced a material effect on the nerves.
We all felt it, even the two workmen who were in the room--a
creeping, tingling sensation from the tips of the fingers to the
roots of the hair.  Impatient to examine the tablet, I removed the
saucer.  As I did so the needle of the compass went round and round
with exceeding swiftness, and I felt a shock that ran through my
whole frame, so that I dropped the saucer on the floor.  The liquid
was spilled--the saucer was broken--the compass rolled to the end of
the room--and at that instant the walls shook to and fro, as if a
giant had swayed and rocked them.

The two workmen were so frightened that they ran up the ladder by
which we had descended from the trap-door; but seeing that nothing
more happened, they were easily induced to return.

Meanwhile I had opened the tablet: it was bound in plain red leather,
with a silver clasp; it contained but one sheet of thick vellum, and
on that sheet were inscribed, within a double pentacle, words in old
monkish Latin, which are literally to be translated thus: "On all
that it can reach within these walls--sentient or inanimate, living
or dead--as moves the needle, so work my will!  Accursed be the
house, and restless be the dwellers therein."

We found no more.  Mr. J---- burned the tablet and its anathema.  He
razed to the foundations the part of the building containing the
secret room with the chamber over it.  He had then the courage to
inhabit the house himself for a month, and a quieter,
better-conditioned house could not be found in all London.
Subsequently he let it to advantage, and his tenant has made no
complaints.




THE DREAM-WOMAN

BY WILKIE COLLINS

_William Wilkie Collins, born in London in 1824, was the son of the
painter William Collins.  He was always called "Wilkie."  Educated
privately, he was articled to a London tea merchant; but, publishing
a book (afterward issued as "Antonina"), he devoted himself to
letters.  In 1851, he met Dickens, and wrote for "Household Words,"
and sometimes collaborated with him.  His works include: "After
Dark," "The Woman in White," "No Name, "The New Magdalen," and "The
Moonstone."  "The Dream-Woman," which exhibits many of his most
striking characteristics, is from "The Queen of Hearts" (1860).  He
died in London in 1889._



THE DREAM-WOMAN

By WILKIE COLLINS

Some years ago there lived in the suburbs of a large seaport town on
the west coast of England a man in humble circumstances, by name
Isaac Scatchard.  His means of subsistence were derived from any
employment that he could get as an ostler, and occasionally when
times went well with him, from temporary engagements in service as
stable-helper in private houses.  Though a faithful, steady, and
honest man, he got on badly in his calling.  His ill-luck was
proverbial among his neighbors.  He was always missing good
opportunities by no fault of his own, and always living longest in
service with amiable people who were not punctual payers of wages.
"Unlucky Isaac" was his nickname in his own neighborhood, and no one
could say that he did not richly deserve it.

With far more than one man's fair share of adversity to endure, Isaac
had but one consolation to support him, and that was of the dreariest
and most negative kind.  He had no wife and children to increase his
anxieties and add to the bitterness of his various failures in life.
It might have been from mere insensibility, or it might have been
from generous unwillingness to involve another in his own unlucky
destiny; but the fact undoubtedly was, that he had arrived at the
middle term of life without marrying, and, what is much more
remarkable, without once exposing himself, from eighteen to
eight-and-thirty, to the genial imputation of ever having had a
sweetheart.

When he was out of service he lived alone with his widowed mother.
Mrs. Scatchard was a woman above the average in her lowly station as
to capacity and manners.  She had seen better days, as the phrase is,
but she never referred to them in the presence of curious visitors;
and, though perfectly polite to every one who approached her, never
cultivated any intimacies among her neighbors.  She contrived to
provide hardly enough for her simple wants by doing rough work for
the tailors, and always managed to keep a decent home for her son to
return to whenever his ill-luck drove him out helpless into the world.

One bleak autumn, when Isaac was getting on fast toward forty, and
when he was, as usual, out of place through no fault of his own, he
set forth from his mother's cottage on a long walk inland to a
gentleman's seat, where he had heard that a stable-helper was
required.

It wanted then but two days of his birthday; and Mrs. Scatchard, with
her usual fondness, made him promise, before he started, that he
would be back in time to keep that anniversary with her, in as
festive a way as their poor means would allow.  It was easy for him
to comply with this request, even supposing he slept a night each way
on the road.

He was to start from home on Monday morning, and, whether he got the
new place or not, he was to be back for his birthday dinner on
Wednesday at two o'clock.

Arriving at his destination too late on the Monday night to make
application for the stable-helper's place, he slept at the village
inn, and in good time on the Tuesday morning presented himself at the
gentleman's house to fill the vacant situation.  Here again his
ill-luck pursued him as inexorably as ever.  The excellent written
testimonials to his character which he was able to procure availed
him nothing; his long walk had been taken in vain: only the day
before the stable-helper's place had been given to another man.

Isaac accepted this new disappointment resignedly and as a matter of
course.  Naturally slow in capacity, he had the bluntness of
sensibility and phlegmatic patience of disposition which frequently
distinguish men with sluggishly working mental powers.  He thanked
the gentleman's steward with his usual quiet civility for granting
him an interview, and took his departure with no appearance of
unusual depression in his face or manner.

Before starting on his homeward walk, he made some inquiries at the
inn, and ascertained that he might save a few miles on his return by
following a new road.  Furnished with full instructions, several
times repeated, as to the various turnings he was to take, he set
forth on his homeward journey, and walked on all day with only one
stoppage for bread and cheese.  Just as it was getting toward dark,
the rain came on and the wind began to rise, and he found himself, to
make matters worse, in a part of the country with which he was
entirely unacquainted, though he knew himself to be some fifteen
miles from home.  The first house he found to inquire at was a lonely
roadside inn, standing on the outskirts of a thick wood.  Solitary as
the place looked, it was welcome to a lost man who was also hungry,
thirsty, foot-sore, and wet.  The landlord was civil, and
respectable-looking, and the price he asked for a bed was reasonable
enough.  Isaac therefore decided on stopping comfortably at the inn
for that night.

He was constitutionally a temperate man.  His supper consisted of two
rashers of bacon, a slice of home-made bread, and a pint of ale.  He
did not go to bed immediately after this moderate meal, but sat up
with the landlord, talking about his bad prospects and his long run
of ill-luck, and diverging from these topics to the subject of
horse-flesh and racing.  Nothing was said either by himself, his
host, or the few laborers who strayed into the tap-room, which could,
in the slightest degree, excite the very small and very dull
imaginative faculty which Isaac Scatchard possessed.

At a little after eleven the house was closed.  Isaac went round with
the landlord and held the candle while the doors and lower windows
were being secured.  He noticed with surprise the strength of the
bolts and bars, and iron-sheathed shutters.

"You see we are rather lonely here," said the landlord.  "We never
have had any attempts made to break in yet, but it's always as well
to be on the safe side.  When nobody is sleeping here, I am the only
man in the house.  My wife and daughter are timid, and the
servant-girl takes after her missuses.  Another glass of ale before
you turn in?  No!  Well, how such a sober man as you come to be out
of a place is more than I can make out, for one.  Here's where you're
to sleep.  You're our only lodger to-night, and I think you'll say my
missus has done her best to make you comfortable.  You're quite sure
you won't have another glass of ale?  Very well.  Good-night."

It was half-past eleven by the clock in the passage as they went
upstairs to the bedroom, the window of which looked on to the wood at
the back of the house.

Isaac locked the door, set his candle on the chest of drawers, and
wearily got ready for bed.  The bleak autumn wind was still blowing,
and the solemn, monotonous, surging moan of it in the wood was dreary
and awful to hear through the night-silence.  Isaac felt strangely
wakeful.  He resolved, as he lay down in bed, to keep the candle
alight until he began to grow sleepy, for there was something
unendurably depressing in the bare idea of laying awake in the
darkness, listening to the dismal, ceaseless moaning of the wind in
the wood.

Sleep stole on him before he was aware of it.  His eyes closed, and
he fell off insensibly to rest without having so much as thought of
extinguishing the candle.

The first sensation of which he was conscious after sinking into
slumber was a strange shivering that ran through him suddenly from
head to foot, and a dreadful sinking pain at the heart, such as he
had never felt before.  The shivering only disturbed his slumbers;
the pain woke him instantly.  In one moment he passed from a state of
sleep to a state of wakefulness--his eyes wide open--his mental
perceptions cleared on a sudden as if by a miracle.

The candle had burned down nearly to the last morsel of tallow, but
the top of the unsnuffed wick had just fallen off, and the light in
the little room was, for the moment, fair and full.

Between the foot of the bed and the closed door there stood a woman
with a knife in her hand, looking at him.

He was stricken speechless with terror, but he did not lose the
preternatural clearness of his faculties, and he never took his eyes
off the woman.  She said not a word as they stared each other in the
face, but she began to move slowly toward the left-hand side of the
bed.

His eyes followed her.  She was a fair, fine woman, with yellowish
flaxen hair and light-gray eyes, with a droop in the left eyelid.  He
noticed those things, and fixed them on his mind before she was round
at the side of the bed.  Speechless, with no expression in her face,
with no noise following her footfall, she came closer and
closer--stopped and slowly raised the knife.  He laid his right arm
over his throat to save it; but, as he saw the knife coming down,
threw his hand across the bed to the right side, and jerked his body
over that way just as the knife descended on the mattress within an
inch of his shoulder.

His eyes fixed on her arm and hand as she slowly drew her knife out
of the bed; a white, well-shaped arm, with a pretty down lying
lightly over the fair skin--a delicate lady's hand; with the crowning
beauty of a pink flush under and round the finger nails.

She drew the knife out, and passed again slowly to the foot of the
bed; stopped there for a moment looking at him; then came on--still
speechless, still with no expression on the blank, beautiful face,
still with no sound following the stealthy footfalls--came on to the
right side of the bed where he now lay.

As she approached, she raised the knife again, and he drew himself
away to the left side.  She struck, as before, right into the
mattress, with a deliberate, perpendicularly downward action of the
arm.  This time his eyes wandered from her to the knife.  It was like
the large clasp-knives which he had often seen laboring men use to
cut their bread and bacon with.  Her delicate little fingers did not
conceal more than two-thirds of the handle; he noticed that it was
made of buckhorn, clean and shining the blade was, and looking like
new.

For the second time she drew the knife out, concealed it in the wide
sleeve of her gown, then stopped by the bedside, watching him.  For
an instant he saw her standing in that position, then the wick of the
spent candle fell over into the socket, the flame diminished to a
little blue point, and the room grew dark.

A moment, or less, if possible, passed so, and then the wick flamed
up, smokingly, for the last time.  His eyes were still looking
eagerly over the right-hand side of the bed when the final flash of
light came, but they discerned nothing.  The fair woman with the
knife was gone.

The conviction that he was alone again weakened the hold of the
terror that had struck him dumb up to this time.  The preternatural
sharpness which the very intensity of his panic had mysteriously
imparted to his faculties left them suddenly.  His brain grew
confused--his heart beat wildly--his ears opened for the first time
since the appearance of the woman to a sense of the woful, ceaseless
moaning of the wind among the trees.  With the dreadful conviction of
the reality of what he had seen still strong within him, he leaped
out of bed, and screaming, "Murder!  Wake up there! wake up!" dashed
headlong through the darkness to the door.

It was fast locked, exactly as he had left it on going to bed.

His cries on starting up had alarmed the house.  He heard the
terrified, confused exclamations of women; he saw the master of the
house approaching along the passage with his burning rush-candle in
one hand and his gun in the other.

"What is it?" asked the landlord, breathlessly.

Isaac could only answer in a whisper.  "A woman, with a knife in her
hand," he gasped out.  "In my room--a fair, yellow-haired woman; she
jobbed at me with the knife twice over."

The landlord's pale cheeks grew paler.  He looked at Isaac eagerly by
the flickering light of his candle, and his face began to get red
again; his voice altered, too, as well as his complexion.

"She seems to have missed you twice," he said.

"I dodged the knife as it came down," Isaac went on, in the same
scared whisper.  "It struck the bed each time."

The landlord took his candle into the bedroom immediately.  In less
than a minute he came out again into the passage in a violent passion.

"The devil fly away with you and your woman with the knife!  There
isn't a mark in the bedclothes anywhere.  What do you mean by coming
into a man's place, and frightening his family out of their wits
about a dream?"

"I'll leave your house," said Isaac, faintly.  "Better out on the
road, in rain and dark, on my road home, than back again in that
room, after what I've seen in it.  Lend me a light to get my clothes
by, and tell me what I'm to pay."

"Pay!" cried the landlord, leading the way with his light sulkily
into the bedroom.  "You'll find your score on the slate when you go
downstairs.  I wouldn't have taken you in for all the money you've
got about you if I'd known your dreaming, screeching ways beforehand.
Look at the bed.  Where's the cut of a knife in it?  Look at the
window--is the lock bursted?  Look at the door (which I heard you
fasten yourself)--is it broke in?  A murdering woman with a knife in
my house!  You ought to be ashamed of yourself!"

Isaac answered not a word.  He huddled on his clothes, and they went
downstairs together.

"Nigh on twenty minutes past two!" said the landlord, as they passed
a clock.  "A nice time in the morning to frighten honest people out
of their wits!"

Isaac paid his bill, and the landlord let him out at the front door,
asking, with a grin of contempt, as he undid the strong fastenings,
whether "the murdering woman got in that way?"

They parted without a word on either side.  The rain had ceased, but
the night was dark, and the wind bleaker than ever.  Little did the
darkness or the cold or the uncertainty about the way home matter to
Isaac.  If he had been turned out into the wilderness in a
thunderstorm, it would have been a relief after what he had suffered
in the bedroom of the inn.

What was the fair woman with the knife?  The creature of a dream, or
that other creature from the unknown world called among men by the
name of ghost?  He could make nothing of the mystery--had made
nothing of it, even when it was midday on Wednesday, and when he
stood, at last, after many times missing his road, once more on the
doorstep of home.

His mother came out eagerly to receive him.  His face told her in a
moment that something was wrong.

"I've lost the place; but that's my luck.  I dreamed an ill dream
last night, mother--or maybe I saw a ghost.  Take it either way, it
scared me out of my senses, and I am not my own man again yet."

"Isaac, your face frightens me.  Come into the fire--come in, and
tell mother all about it."

He was as anxious to tell as she was to hear: for it had been his
hope, all the way home, that his mother, with her quicker capacity
and superior knowledge, might be able to throw some light on the
mystery which he could not clear up for himself.  His memory of the
dream was still mechanically vivid, though his thoughts were entirely
confused by it.

His mother's face grew paler and paler as he went on.  She never
interrupted him by so much as a single word; but when he had done,
she moved her chair close to his, put her arms around his neck, and
said to him:

"Isaac, you dreamed your ill dream on this Wednesday morning.  What
time was it when you saw the fair woman with a knife in her hand?"

Isaac reflected on what the landlord had said when they had passed by
the clock on his leaving the inn; allowed as nearly as he could for
the time that must have elapsed between the unlocking of his bedroom
door and the paying of his bill just before going away, and answered:

"Somewhere about two o'clock in the morning."

His mother suddenly quitted her hold of his neck, and struck her
hands together with a gesture of despair.

"This Wednesday is your birthday, Isaac, and two o'clock in the
morning was the time when you were born."

Isaac's capacities were not quick enough to catch the infection of
his mother's superstitious dread.  He was amazed, and a little
startled also, when she suddenly rose from her chair, opened her old
writing-desk, took pen, ink, and paper, and then said to him:

"Your memory is but a poor one, Isaac, and now I'm an old woman
mine's not much better.  I want all about this dream of yours to be
as well known to both of us, years hence, as it is now.  Tell me over
again all you told me a minute ago, when you spoke of what the woman
with the knife looked like."

Isaac obeyed, and marveled much as he saw his mother carefully set
down on paper the very words that he was saying.

"Light-gray eyes," she wrote, as they came to the descriptive part,
"with a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen hair, with a gold-yellow
streak in it; white arms, with a down upon them; little lady's hand,
with a reddish look about the finger nails; clasp-knife with a
buckhorn handle, that seemed as good as new."  To these particulars
Mrs. Scatchard added the year, month, day of the week, and time in
the morning when the woman of the dream appeared to her son.  She
then locked up the paper carefully in the writing-desk.

Neither on that day nor on any day after could her son induce her to
return to the matter of the dream.  She obstinately kept her thoughts
about it to herself, and even refused to refer again to the paper in
her writing-desk.  Ere long Isaac grew weary of attempting to make
her break her resolute silence; and time, which sooner or later wears
out all things, gradually wore out the impression produced on him by
the dream.  He began by thinking of it carelessly, and he ended by
not thinking of it at all.

The result was the more easily brought about by the advent of some
important changes for the better in his prospects, which commenced
not long after his terrible night's experience at the inn.  He reaped
at last the reward of his long and patient suffering under adversity
by getting an excellent place, keeping it for seven years, and
leaving it, on the death of his master, not only with an excellent
character, but also with a comfortable annuity bequeathed to him as a
reward for saving his mistress's life in a carriage accident.  Thus
it happened that Isaac Scatchard returned to his old mother, seven
years after the time of the dream at the inn, with an annual sum of
money at his disposal sufficient to keep them both in ease and
independence for the rest of their lives.

The mother, whose health had been bad of late years, profited so much
by the care bestowed on her and by freedom from money anxieties, that
when Isaac's birthday came round she was able to sit up comfortably
at table and dine with him.

On that day, as the evening drew on, Mrs. Scatchard discovered that a
bottle of tonic medicine which she was accustomed to take, and in
which she had fancied that a dose or more was still left, happened to
be empty.  Isaac immediately volunteered to go to the chemist's and
get it filled again.  It was as rainy and bleak an autumn night as on
the memorable past occasion when he lost his way and slept at the
roadside inn.

On going into the chemist's shop he was passed hurriedly by a poorly
dressed woman coming out of it.  The glimpse he had of her face
struck him, and he looked back after her as she descended the door
steps.

"You're noticing that woman?" said the chemist's apprentice behind
the counter.  "It's my opinion there's something wrong with her.
She's been asking for laudanum to put to a bad tooth.  Master's out
for half an hour, and I told her I wasn't allowed to sell poison to
strangers in his absence.  She laughed in a queer way, and said she
would come back in half an hour.  If she expects master to serve her,
I think she'll be disappointed.  It's a case of suicide, sir, if ever
there was one yet."

These words added immeasurably to the sudden interest in the woman
which Isaac had felt at the first sight of her face.  After he had
got the medicine-bottle filled, he looked about anxiously for her as
soon as he was out in the street.  She was walking slowly up and down
on the opposite side of the road.  With his heart, very much to his
own surprise, beating fast, Isaac crossed over and spoke to her.

He asked if she was in any distress.  She pointed to her torn shawl,
her scanty dress, her crushed, dirty bonnet; then moved under a lamp
so as to let the light fall on her stern, pale, but still most
beautiful face.

"I look like a comfortable, happy woman, don't I?" she said, with a
bitter laugh.

She spoke with a purity of intonation which Isaac had never heard
before from other lips than ladies' lips.  Her slightest action
seemed to have the easy, negligent grace of a thoroughbred woman.
Her skin, for all its poverty-stricken paleness, was as delicate as
if her life had been passed in the enjoyment of every social comfort
that wealth can purchase.  Even her small, finely shaped hands,
gloveless as they were, had not lost their whiteness.

Little by little, in answer to his question, the sad story of the
woman came out.  There is no need to relate it here; it is told over
and over again in police reports and paragraphs about attempted
suicides.

"My name is Rebecca Murdoch," said the woman, as she ended.  "I have
ninepence left, and I thought of spending it at the chemist's over
the way in securing a passage to the other world.  Whatever it is, it
can't be worse to me than this, so why should I stop here?"

Besides the natural compassion and sadness moved in his heart by what
he heard, Isaac felt within him some mysterious influence at work all
the time the woman was speaking which utterly confused his ideas and
almost deprived him of his powers of speech.  All that he could say
in answer to her last reckless words was that he would prevent her
from attempting her own life, if he followed her about all night to
do it.  His rough, trembling earnestness seemed to impress her.

"I won't occasion you that trouble," she answered, when he repeated
his threat.  "You have given me a fancy for living by speaking kindly
to me.  No need for the mockery of protestations and promises.  You
may believe me without them.  Come to Fuller's Meadow to-morrow at
twelve, and you will find me alive, to answer for myself--  No!--no
money.  My ninepence will do to get me as good a night's lodging as I
want."

She nodded and left him.  He made no attempt to follow--he felt no
suspicion that she was deceiving him.

"It's strange, but I can't help believing her," he said to himself,
and walked away, bewildered, toward home.

On entering the house his mind was still so completely absorbed by
its new subject of interest that he took no notice of what his mother
was doing when he came in with the bottle of medicine.  She had
opened her old writing-desk in his absence, and was now reading a
paper attentively that lay inside it.  On every birthday of Isaac's
since she had written down the particulars of his dream from his own
lips, she had been accustomed to read that same paper, and ponder
over it in private.

The next day he went to Fuller's Meadow.

He had done only right in believing her so implicitly.  She was
there, punctual to a minute, to answer for herself.  The last-left
faint defenses in Isaac's heart against the fascination which a word
or look from her began inscrutably to exercise over him sank down and
vanished before her forever on that memorable morning.

When a man previously insensible to the influence of woman forms an
attachment in middle life, the instances are rare indeed, let the
warning circumstances be what they may, in which he is found capable
of freeing himself from the tyranny of the new ruling passion.  The
charm of being spoken to familiarly, fondly, and gratefully by a
woman whose language and manners still retained enough of their early
refinement to hint at the high social station that she had lost,
would have been a dangerous luxury to a man of Isaac's rank at the
age of twenty.  But it was far more than that--it was certain ruin to
him--now that his heart was opening unworthily to a new influence at
that middle time of life when strong feelings of all kinds, once
implanted, strike root most stubbornly in a man's moral nature.  A
few more stolen interviews after that first morning in Fuller's
Meadow completed his infatuation.  In less than a month from the time
when he first met her, Isaac Scatchard had consented to give Rebecca
Murdoch a new interest in existence and a chance of recovering the
character she had lost by promising to make her his wife.

She had taken possession, not of his passions only, but of his
faculties as well.  All the mind he had he put into her keeping.  She
directed him on every point--even instructing him how to break the
news of his approaching marriage in the safest manner to his mother.

"If you tell her how you met me and who I am at first," said the
cunning woman, "she will move heaven and earth to prevent our
marriage.  Say I am the sister of one of your fellow-servants--ask
her to see me before you go into any more particulars--and leave it
to me to do the rest.  I mean to make her love me next best to you,
Isaac, before she knows anything of who I really am."

The motive of the deceit was sufficient to sanctify it to Isaac.  The
stratagem proposed relieved him of his one great anxiety, and quieted
his uneasy conscience on the subject of his mother.  Still, there was
something wanting to perfect his happiness, something that he could
not realize, something mysteriously untraceable, and yet something
that perpetually made itself felt; not when he was absent from
Rebecca Murdoch, but, strange to say, when he was actually in her
presence!  She was kindness itself with him.  She never made him feel
his inferior capacities and inferior manners.  She showed the
sweetest anxiety to please him in the smallest trifles; but, in spite
of all these attractions, he never could feel quite at his ease with
her.  At their first meeting there had mingled with his admiration,
when he looked in her face, a faint, involuntary feeling of doubt
whether that face was entirely strange to him.  No after-familiarity
had the slightest effect on this inexplicable, wearisome uncertainty.

Concealing the truth as he had been directed, he announced his
marriage engagement precipitately and confusedly to his mother on the
day when he contracted it.  Poor Mrs. Scatchard showed her perfect
confidence in her son by flinging her arms round his neck, and giving
him joy of having found at last, in the sister of one of his
fellow-servants, a woman to comfort and care for him after his mother
was gone.  She was all eagerness to see the woman of her son's
choice, and the next day was fixed for the introduction.

It was a bright sunny morning, and the little cottage parlor was full
of light as Mrs. Scatchard, happy and expectant, dressed for the
occasion in her Sunday gown, sat waiting for her son and her future
daughter-in-law.

Punctual to the appointed time, Isaac hurriedly and nervously led his
promised wife into the room.  His mother rose to receive
her--advanced a few steps smiling--looked Rebecca full in the eyes,
and suddenly stopped.  Her face, which had been flushed the moment
before, turned white in an instant; her eyes lost their expression of
softness and kindness, and assumed a blank look of terror; her
outstretched hands fell to her sides, and she staggered back a few
steps with a low cry to her son.

"Isaac," she whispered, clutching him fast by the arm when he asked
alarmedly if she was taken ill, "Isaac, does that woman's face remind
you of nothing?"

Before he could answer--before he could look round to where Rebecca
stood, astonished and angered by her reception, at the lower end of
the room--his mother pointed impatiently to her writing-desk, and
gave him the key.

"Open it," she said, in a quick, breathless whisper.

"What does this mean?  Why am I treated as if I had no business here?
Does your mother want to insult me?" asked Rebecca, angrily.

"Open it, and give me the paper in the left-hand drawer.  Quick!
quick, for Heaven's sake!" said Mrs. Scatchard, shrinking further
back in terror.

Isaac gave her the paper.  She looked it over eagerly for a moment,
then followed Rebecca, who was now turning away haughtily to leave
the room, and caught her by the shoulder--abruptly raised the long,
loose sleeve of her gown, and glanced at her hand and arm.  Something
like fear began to steal over the angry expression of Rebecca's face
as she shook herself free from the old woman's grasp.  "Mad!" she
said to herself, "and Isaac never told me."  With these few words she
left the room.

Isaac was hastening after her when his mother turned and stopped his
further progress.  It wrung his heart to see the misery and terror in
her face as she looked at him.

"Light-gray eyes," she said, in low, mournful, awe-struck tones,
pointing toward the open door; "a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen
hair, with a gold-yellow streak in it; white arms, with a down upon
them; little lady's hand, with a reddish look under the finger
nails--The Dream-Woman, Isaac, the Dream-Woman!"

That faint cleaving doubt which he had never been able to shake off
in Rebecca Murdoch's presence was fatally set at rest forever.  He
had seen her face, then, before--seven years before, on his birthday,
in the bedroom of the lonely inn.

"Be warned!  oh, my son, be warned!  Isaac, Isaac, let her go, and do
you stop with me!"

Something darkened the parlor window as those words were said.  A
sudden chill ran through him, and he glanced sidelong at the shadow.
Rebecca Murdoch had come back.  She was peering in curiously at them
over the low window-blind.

"I have promised to marry, mother," he said, "and marry I must."

The tears came into his eyes as he spoke and dimmed his sight, but he
could just discern the fatal face outside moving away again from the
window.

His mother's head sank lower.

"Are you faint?" he whispered.

"Broken-hearted, Isaac."

He stooped down and kissed her.  The shadow, as he did so, returned
to the window, and the fatal face peered in curiously once more.

Three weeks after that day Isaac and Rebecca were man and wife.  All
that was hopelessly dogged and stubborn in the man's moral nature
seemed to have closed round his fatal passion, and to have fixed it
unassailably in his heart.

After that first interview in the cottage parlor no consideration
would induce Mrs. Scatchard to see her son's wife again, or even to
talk of her when Isaac tried hard to plead her cause after their
marriage.

This course of conduct was not in any degree occasioned by a
discovery of the degradation in which Rebecca had lived.  There was
no question of that between mother and son.  There was no question of
anything but the fearfully exact resemblance between the living,
breathing woman and the spectre-woman of Isaac's dream.

Rebecca, on her side, neither felt nor expressed the slightest sorrow
at the estrangement between herself and her mother-in-law.  Isaac,
for the sake of peace, had never contradicted her first idea that age
and long illness had affected Mrs. Scatchard's mind.  He even allowed
his wife to upbraid him for not having confessed this to her at the
time of their marriage engagement rather than risk anything by
hinting at the truth.  The sacrifice of his integrity before his one
all-mastering delusion seemed but a small thing, and cost his
conscience but little after the sacrifices he had already made.

The time of waking from this delusion--the cruel and the rueful
time--was not far off.  After some quiet months of married life, as
the summer was ending, and the year was getting on toward the month
of his birthday, Isaac found his wife altering toward him.  She grew
sullen and contemptuous; she formed acquaintances of the most
dangerous kind in defiance of his objections, his entreaties, and his
commands; and, worst of all, she learned, erelong, after every fresh
difference with her husband, to seek the deadly self-oblivion of
drink.  Little by little, after the first miserable discovery that
his wife was keeping company with drunkards, the shocking certainty
forced itself on Isaac that she had grown to be a drunkard herself.

He had been in a sadly desponding state for some time before the
occurrence of these domestic calamities.  His mother's health, as he
could but too plainly discern every time he went to see her at the
cottage, was failing fast, and he upbraided himself in secret as the
cause of the bodily and mental suffering she endured.  When to his
remorse on his mother's account was added the shame and misery
occasioned by the discovery of his wife's degradation, he sank under
the double trial--his face began to alter fast, and he looked what he
was, a spirit-broken man.

His mother, still struggling bravely against the illness that was
hurrying her to the grave, was the first to notice the sad alteration
in him, and the first to hear of his last worst trouble with his
wife.  She could only weep bitterly on the day when he made his
humiliating confession, but on the next occasion when he went to see
her she had taken a resolution in reference to his domestic
afflictions which astonished and even alarmed him.  He found her
dressed to go out, and on asking the reason received this answer:

"I am not long for this world, Isaac," she said, "and I shall not
feel easy on my death-bed unless I have done my best to the last to
make my son happy.  I mean to put my own fears and my own feelings
out of the question, and to go with you to your wife, and try what I
can do to reclaim her.  Give me your arm, Isaac, and let me do the
last thing I can in this world to help my son before it is too late."

He could not disobey her, and they walked together slowly toward his
miserable home.

It was only one o'clock in the afternoon when they reached the
cottage where he lived.  It was their dinner-hour, and Rebecca was in
the kitchen.  He was thus able to take his mother quietly into the
parlor, and then prepare his wife for the interview.  She had
fortunately drunk but little at that early hour, and she was less
sullen and capricious than usual.

He returned to his mother with his mind tolerably at ease.  His wife
soon followed him into the parlor, and the meeting between her and
Mrs. Scatchard passed off better than he had ventured to anticipate,
though he observed with secret apprehension that his mother,
resolutely as she controlled herself in other respects, could not
look his wife in the face when she spoke to her.  It was a relief to
him, therefore, when Rebecca began to lay the cloth.

She laid the cloth, brought in the bread-tray, and cut a slice from
the loaf for her husband, then returned to the kitchen.  At that
moment, Isaac, still anxiously watching his mother, was startled by
seeing the same ghastly change pass over her face which had altered
it so awfully on the morning when Rebecca and she first met.  Before
he could say a word, she whispered, with a look of horror:

"Take me back--home, home again, Isaac.  Come with me, and never go
back again."

He was afraid to ask for an explanation; he could only sign to her to
be silent, and help her quickly to the door.  As they passed the
bread-tray on the table she stopped and pointed to it.

"Did you see what your wife cut your bread with?" she asked, in a low
whisper.

"No, mother--I was not noticing--what was it?"

"Look!"

He did look.  A new clasp-knife, with a buckhorn handle, lay with the
loaf in the bread-tray.  He stretched out his hand shudderingly to
possess himself of it; but, at the same time, there was a noise in
the kitchen, and his mother caught at his arm.

"The knife of the dream!  Isaac, I'm faint with fear.  Take me away
before she comes back."

He was hardly able to support her.  The visible, tangible reality of
the knife struck him with a panic, and utterly destroyed any faint
doubts that he might have entertained up to this time in relation to
the mysterious dream-warning of nearly eight years before.  By a last
desperate effort, he summoned self-possession enough to help his
mother out of the house--so quietly that the "Dream-Woman" (he
thought of her by that name now) did not hear them departing from the
kitchen.

"Don't go back, Isaac--don't go back!" implored Mrs. Scatchard, as he
turned to go away, after seeing her safely seated again in her own
room.

"I must get the knife," he answered, under his breath.  His mother
tried to stop him again, but he hurried out without another word.

On his return he found that his wife had discovered their secret
departure from the house.  She had been drinking, and was in a fury
of passion.  The dinner in the kitchen was flung under the grate; the
cloth was off the parlor table.  Where was the knife?

Unwisely, he asked for it.  She was only too glad of the opportunity
of irritating him which the request afforded her.  He wanted the
knife, did he?  Could he give her a reason why?  No!  Then he should
not have it--not if he went down on his knees to ask for it.  Further
recrimination elicited the fact that she had bought it a bargain, and
that she considered it her own especial property.  Isaac saw the
uselessness of attempting to get the knife by fair means, and
determined to search for it, later in the day, in secret.  The search
was unsuccessful.  Night came on, and he left the house to walk about
the streets.  He was afraid now to sleep in the same room with her.

Three weeks passed.  Still sullenly enraged with him, she would not
give up the knife; and still that fear of sleeping in the same room
with her possessed him.  He walked about at night, or dozed in the
parlor, or sat watching by his mother's bedside.  Before the
expiration of the first week in the new month his mother died.  It
wanted then but ten days of her son's birthday.  She had longed to
live till that anniversary.  Isaac was present at her death, and her
last words in this world were addressed to him:

"Don't go back, my son, don't go back!"

He was obliged to go back, if it were only to watch his wife.
Exasperated to the last degree by his distrust of her, she had
revengefully sought to add a sting to his grief, during the last days
of his mother's illness, by declaring that she would assert her right
to attend the funeral.  In spite of all that he could do or say, she
held with wicked pertinacity to her word, and on the day appointed
for the burial forced herself--inflamed and shameless with
drink--into her husband's presence, and declared that she would walk
in the funeral procession to his mother's grave.

This last worst outrage, accompanied by all that was most insulting
in word and look, maddened him for the moment.  He struck her.

The instant the blow was dealt he repented it.  She crouched down,
silent, in a corner of the room, and eyed him steadily; it was a look
that cooled his hot blood and made him tremble.  But there was no
time now to think of a means of making atonement.  Nothing remained
but to risk the worst till the funeral was over.  There was but one
way of making sure of her.  He locked her in her bedroom.

When he came back some hours after, he found her sitting, very much
altered in look and bearing, by the bedside, with a bundle on her
lap.  She rose and faced him quietly, and spoke with a strange
stillness in her voice, a strange repose in her eyes, a strange
composure in her manner.

"No man has ever struck me twice," she said, "and my husband shall
have no second opportunity.  Set the door open and let me go.  From
this day forth we see each other no more."

Before he could answer she passed him and left the room.  He saw her
walk away up the street.

Would she return?

All that night he watched and waited, but no footstep came near the
house.  The next night, overpowered by fatigue, he lay down in bed in
his clothes, with the door locked, the key on the table, and the
candle burning.  His slumber was not disturbed.  The third night, the
fourth, the fifth, the sixth passed, and nothing happened.  He lay
down on the seventh, still in his clothes, still with the door
locked, the key on the table, and the candle burning, but easier in
his mind.

Easier in his mind, and in perfect health of body when he fell off to
sleep.  But his rest was disturbed.  He woke twice without any
sensation of uneasiness.  But the third time it was that
never-to-be-forgotten shivering of the night at the lonely inn, that
dreadful sinking pain at the heart, which once more aroused him in an
instant.

His eyes opened toward the left-hand side of the bed, and there
stood--

The Dream-Woman again?  No!  his wife; the living reality, with the
dream-spectre's face, in the dream-spectre's attitude; the fair arm
up, the knife clasped in the delicate white hand.

He sprang upon her almost at the instant of seeing her, and yet not
quickly enough to prevent her from hiding the knife.  Without a word
from him--without a cry from her--he pinioned her in a chair.  With
one hand he felt up her sleeve, and there, where the Dream-Woman had
hidden the knife, his wife had hidden it--the knife with the buckhorn
handle, that looked like new.

In the despair of that fearful moment his brain was steady, his heart
was calm.  He looked at her fixedly with the knife in his hand, and
said these last words:

"You have told me we should see each other no more, and you have come
back.  It is now my turn to go, and to go forever.  I say that we
shall see each other no more, and my word shall not be broken."

He left her, and set forth into the night.  There was a bleak wind
abroad, and the smell of recent rain was in the air.  The distant
church-clocks chimed the quarter as he walked rapidly beyond the last
houses in the suburb.  He asked the first policeman he met what hour
that was of which the quarter past had just struck.

The man referred sleepily to his watch, and answered, "Two o'clock."
Two in the morning.  What day of the month was this day that had just
begun?  He reckoned it up from the date of his mother's funeral.  The
fatal parallel was complete: it was his birthday!

Had he escaped the mortal peril which his dream foretold? or had he
only received a second warning?

As that ominous doubt forced itself on his mind, he stopped,
reflected, and turned back again toward the city.  He was still
resolute to hold to his word, and never to let her see him more; but
there was a thought now in his mind of having her watched and
followed.  The knife was in his possession; the world was before him;
but a new distrust of her--a vague, unspeakable, superstitious
dread--had come over him.

"I must know where she goes, now she thinks I have left her," he said
to himself, as he stole back wearily to the precincts of his house.

It was still dark.  He had left the candle burning in the
bed-chamber; but when he looked up to the window of the room now,
there was no light in it.  He crept cautiously to the house door.  On
going away, he remembered to have closed it; on trying it now, he
found it open.

He waited outside, never losing sight of the house, till daylight.
Then he ventured indoors--listened, and heard nothing--looked into
kitchen, scullery, parlor, and found nothing; went up, at last, into
the bedroom--it was empty.  A picklock lay on the floor, betraying
how she had gained entrance in the night, and that was the only trace
of her.

Whither had she gone?  That no mortal tongue could tell him.  The
darkness had covered her flight; and when the day broke no man could
say where the light found her.

Before leaving the house and the town forever, he gave instructions
to a friend and neighbor to sell his furniture for anything that it
would fetch, and apply the proceeds to employing the police to trace
her.  The directions were honestly followed, and the money was all
spent, but the inquiries led to nothing.  The picklock on the bedroom
floor remained the one last useless trace of the Dream-Woman.




GREEN BRANCHES

BY FIONA MACLEOD

_Fiona (which is Gaelic for Flora) Macleod was the name of one of the
most sympathetic writers in the so-called Celtic movement.  With that
intensity of feeling characteristic of the Celtic people she
succeeded in expressing much of the mystic beauty of the old Gaelic
legends._

_Upon the death of William Sharp, the author and critic, in the
spring of 1906, a long-concealed secret was brought to light:--Fiona
Macleod and William Sharp were one and the same person._



GREEN BRANCHES*

*From "The Sin-Eater."

By FIONA MACLEOD

In the year that followed the death of Manus MacCodrum, James Achanna
saw nothing of his brother Gloom.  He might have thought himself
alone in the world, of all his people, but for a letter that came to
him out of the west.  True, he had never accepted the common opinion
that his brothers had both been drowned on that night when Anne
Gillespie left Eilanmore with Manus.

In the first place, he had nothing of that inner conviction
concerning the fate of Gloom which he had concerning that of Marcus;
in the next, had he not heard the sound of the _feadan_, which no one
that he knew played except Gloom; and, for further token, was not the
tune that which he hated above all others--the "Dance of the
Dead"--for who but Gloom would be playing that, he hating it so, and
the hour being late, and no one else on Eilanmore?  It was no sure
thing that the dead had not come back; but the more he thought of it
the more Achanna believed that his sixth brother was still alive.  Of
this, however, he said nothing to any one.

It was as a man set free that, at last, after long waiting and
patient trouble with the disposal of all that was left of the Achanna
heritage, he left the island.  It was a gray memory for him.  The
bleak moorland of it, the blight that had lain so long and so often
upon the crops, the rains that had swept the isle for gray days and
gray weeks and gray months, the sobbing of the sea by day and its
dark moan by night, its dim relinquishing sigh in the calm of dreary
ebbs, its hollow, baffling roar when the storm-shadow swept up out of
the sea--one and all oppressed him, even in memory.  He had never
loved the island, even when it lay green and fragrant in the green
and white seas under white and blue skies, fresh and sweet as an Eden
of the sea.

He had ever been lonely and weary, tired of the mysterious shadow
that lay upon his folk, caring little for any of his brothers except
the eldest--long since mysteriously gone out of the ken of man--and
almost hating Gloom, who had ever borne him a grudge because of his
beauty, and because of his likeness to and reverent heed for Alison.
Moreover, ever since he had come to love Katreen Macarthur, the
daughter of Donald Macarthur who lived in Sleat of Skye, he had been
eager to live near her; the more eager as he knew that Gloom loved
the girl also, and wished for success not only for his own sake, but
so as to put a slight upon his younger brother.

So, when at last he left the island, he sailed southward gladly.  He
was leaving Eilanmore; he was bound to a new home in Skye, and
perhaps he was going to his long-delayed, long dreamed-of happiness.
True, Katreen was not pledged to him; he did not even know for sure
if she loved him.  He thought, hoped, dreamed, almost believed that
she did; but then there was her cousin Ian, who had long wooed her,
and to whom old Donald Macarthur had given his blessing.
Nevertheless, his heart would have been lighter than it had been for
long, but for two things.  First, there was the letter.  Some weeks
earlier he had received it, not recognizing the writing, because of
the few letters he had ever seen, and, moreover, as it was in a
feigned hand.  With difficulty he had deciphered the manuscript,
plain printed though it was.  It ran thus:


"Well, Sheumais, my brother, it is wondering if I am dead, you will
be.  Maybe ay, and maybe no.  But I send you this writing to let you
see that I know all you do and think of.  So you are going to leave
Eilanmore without an Achanna upon it?  And you will be going to Sleat
in Skye?  Well, let me be telling you this thing.  _Do not go_.  I
see blood there.  And there is this, too: neither you nor any man
shall take Katreen away from me.  _You_ know that; and Ian Macarthur
knows it; and Katreen knows it; and that holds whether I am alive or
dead.  I say to you: do not go.  It will be better for you, and for
all.  Ian Macarthur is away in the north-sea with the whaler-captain
who came to us at Eilanmore, and will not be back for three months
yet.  It will be better for him not to come back.  But if he comes
back he will have to reckon with the man who says that Katreen
Macarthur is his.  I would rather not have two men to speak to, and
one my brother.  It does not matter to you where I am.  I want no
money just now.  But put aside my portion for me.  Have it ready for
me against the day I call for it.  I will not be patient that day; so
have it ready for me.  In the place that I am I am content.  You will
be saying: why is my brother away in a remote place (I will say this
to you: that it is not further north than St. Kilda nor further south
than the Mull of Cantyrel), and for what reason?  That is between me
and silence.  But perhaps you think of Anne sometimes.  Do you know
that she lies under the green grass?  And of Manus MacCodrum?  They
say that he swam out into the sea and was drowned; and they whisper
of the seal-blood, though the minister is wrath with them for that.
He calls it a madness.  Well, I was there at that madness, and I
played to it on my _feadan_.  And now, Sheumais, can you be thinking
of what the tune was that I played?

  "Your brother, who waits his own day,
      "GLOOM.

"Do not be forgetting this thing: _I would rather not be playing the
'Damhsa-na-Mairbh.'_  It was an ill hour for Manus when he heard the
'Dan-nan-Ron'; it was the song of his soul, that; and yours is the
'Davsa-na-Mairv.'"


This letter was ever in his mind: this, and what happened in the
gloaming when he sailed away for Skye in the herring-smack of two men
who lived at Armadale in Sleat.  For, as the boat moved slowly out of
the haven, one of the men asked him if he was sure that no one was
left upon the island; for he thought he had seen a figure on the
rocks, waving a black scarf.  Achanna shook his head; but just then
his companion cried that at that moment he had seen the same thing.
So the smack was put about, and when she was moving slowly through
the haven again, Achanna sculled ashore in the little coggly punt.
In vain he searched here and there, calling loudly again and again.
Both men could hardly have been mistaken, he thought.  If there were
no human creature on the island, and if their eyes had not played
them false, who could it be?  The wraith of Marcus, mayhap; or might
it be the old man himself (his father), risen to bid farewell to his
youngest son, or to warn him?

It was no use to wait longer, so, looking often behind him, he made
his way to the boat again, and rowed slowly out toward the smack.

_Jerk--jerk--jerk_ across the water came, low but only too loud for
him, the opening motif of the "Damhsa-na-Mairbh." A horror came upon
him, and he drove the boat through the water so that the sea splashed
over the bows.  When he came on deck he cried in a hoarse voice to
the man next him to put up the helm, and let the smack swing to the
wind.

"There is no one there, Callum Campbell," he whispered.

"And who is it that will be making that strange music?"

"What music?"

"Sure it has stopped now, but I heard it clear, and so did Anndra
MacEwan.  It was like the sound of a reed pipe, and the tune was an
eery one at that."

"It was the Dance of the Dead."

"And who will be playing that?" asked the man, with fear in his eyes.

"No living man."

"No living man?"

"No.  I'm thinking it will be one of my brothers who was drowned
here, and by the same token that it is Gloom, for he played upon the
_feadan_.  But if not, then--then--"

The two men waited in breathless silence, each trembling with
superstitious fear; but at last the elder made a sign to Achanna to
finish.

"Then--it will be the Kelpie."

"Is there--is there one of the--cave-women here?"

"It is said; and you know of old that the Kelpie sings or plays a
strange tune to wile seamen to their death."

At that moment the fantastic, jerking music came loud and clear
across the bay.  There was a horrible suggestion in it, as if dead
bodies were moving along the ground with long jerks, and crying and
laughing wild.  It was enough; the men, Campbell and MacEwan, would
not now have waited longer if Achanna had offered them all he had in
the world.  Nor were they, or he, out of their panic haste till the
smack stood well out at sea, and not a sound could be heard from
Eilanmore.

They stood watching, silent.  Out of the dusky mass that lay in the
seaward way to the north came a red gleam.  It was like an eye
staring after them with blood-red glances.

"What is that, Achanna?" asked one of the men at last.

"It looks as though a fire had been lighted in the house up in the
island.  The door and the window must be open.  The fire must be fed
with wood, for no peats would give that flame; and there were none
lighted when I left.  To my knowing, there was no wood for burning
except the wood of the shelves and the bed."

"And who would be doing that?"

"I know of that no more than you do, Callum Campbell."

No more was said, and it was a relief to all when the last glimmer of
the light was absorbed in the darkness.

At the end of the voyage Campbell and MacEwan were well pleased to be
quit of their companion; not so much because he was moody and
distraught as because they feared that a spell was upon him--a fate
in the working of which they might become involved.  It needed no vow
of the one to the other for them to come to the conclusion that they
would never land on Eilanmore, or, if need be, only in broad
daylight, and never alone.


The days went well for James Achanna, where he made his home at
Ranza-beag, on Ranza Water in the Sleat of Skye.  The farm was small
but good, and he hoped that with help and care he would soon have the
place as good a farm as there was in all Skye.

Donald Macarthur did not let him see much of Katreen, but the old man
was no longer opposed to him.  Sheumais must wait till Ian Macarthur
came back again, which might be any day now.  For sure, James Achanna
of Ranza-beag was a very different person from the youngest of the
Achanna-folk, who held by on lonely Eilanmore; moreover, the old man
could not but think with pleasure that it would be well to see
Katreen able to walk over the whole land of Ranza, from the cairn at
the north of his own Ranza-M√≤r to the burn at the south of
Ranza-beag, and know it for her own.

But Achanna was ready to wait.  Even before he had the secret word of
Katreen he knew from her beautiful dark eyes that she loved him.  As
the weeks went by they managed to meet often, and at last Katreen
told him that she loved him too, and would have none but him; but
that they must wait till Ian came back, because of the pledge given
to him by her father.  They were days of joy for him.  Through many a
hot noontide hour, through many a gloaming he went as one in a dream.
Whenever he saw a birch swaying in the wind, or a wave leaping upon
Loch Liath, that was near his home, or passed a bush covered with
wild roses, or saw the moonbeams lying white on the boles of the
pines, he thought of Katreen--his fawn for grace, and so lithe and
tall, with sunbrown face and wavy, dark mass of hair, and shadowy
eyes and rowan-red lips.  It is said that there is a god clothed in
shadow who goes to and fro among the human kind, putting silence
between lovers with his waving hands, and breathing a chill out of
his cold breath, and leaving a gulf of deep water flowing between
them because of the passing of his feet.  That shadow never came
their way.  Their love grew as a flower fed by rains and warmed by
sunlight.

When midsummer came, and there was no sign of Ian Macarthur, it was
already too late.  Katreen had been won.

During the summer months it was the custom for Katreen and two of the
farm-girls to go up Maol-Ranza, to reside at the shealing of
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch: and this because of the hill-pasture for the sheep.
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch is a round, boulder-studded hill covered with
heather, which has a precipitous corrie on each side, and in front
slopes down to Lochan Fraoch, a lochlet surrounded by dark woods.
Behind the hill, or great hillock rather, lay the shealing.  At each
week-end Katreen went down to Ranza-M√≤r, and on every Monday morning
at sunrise returned to her heather-girt eyry.  It was on one of these
visits that she endured a cruel shock.  Her father told her that she
must marry some one else than Sheumais Achanna.  He had heard words
about him which made a union impossible, and indeed, he hoped that
the man would leave Ranza-beag.  In the end he admitted that what he
had heard was to the effect that Achanna was under a doom of some
kind, that he was involved in a blood feud; and, moreover, that he
was fey.  The old man would not be explicit as to the person from
whom his information came, but hinted that he was a stranger of rank,
probably a laird of the isles.  Besides this, there was word of Ian
Macarthur.  He was at Thurso, in the far north, and would be in Skye
before long, and he--her father--had written to him that he might wed
Katreen as soon as was practicable.

"Do you see that lintie yonder, father?" was her response to this.

"Ay, lass, and what about the birdeen?"

"Well, when she mates with a hawk, so will I be mating with Ian
Macarthur, but not till then."

With that she turned and left the house, and went back to
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch.  On the way she met Achanna.

It was that night that for the first time he swam across Lochan
Fraoch to meet Katreen.

The quickest way to reach the shealing was to row across the lochlet,
and then ascend by a sheep-path that wound through the hazel copses
at the base of the hill.  Fully half an hour was thus saved, because
of the steepness of the precipitous corries to right and left.  A
boat was kept for this purpose, but it was fastened to a
shore-boulder by a padlocked iron chain, the key of which was kept by
Donald Macarthur.  Latterly he had refused to let this key out of his
possession.  For one thing, no doubt, he believed he could thus
restrain Achanna from visiting his daughter.  The young man could not
approach the shealing from either side without being seen.

But that night, soon after the moon was whitening slow in the dark,
Katreen stole down to the hazel copse and awaited the coming of her
lover.  The lochan was visible from almost any point on
Cnoc-an-Fhraoch, as well as from the south side.  To cross it in a
boat unseen, if any watcher were near, would be impossible, nor could
even a swimmer hope to escape notice unless in the gloom of night or,
mayhap, in the dusk.  When, however, she saw, half-way across the
water, a spray of green branches slowly moving athwart the surface,
she knew that Sheumais was keeping his tryst.  If, perchance, any one
else saw, he or she would never guess that those derelict rowan
branches shrouded Sheumais Achanna.

It was not till the estray had drifted close to the ledge, where, hid
among the bracken and the hazel undergrowth, she awaited him, that
Katreen descried the face of her lover, as with one hand he parted
the green sprays, and stared longingly and lovingly at the figure he
could just discern in the dim, fragrant obscurity.

And as it was this night so was it many of the nights that followed.
Katreen spent the days as in a dream.  Not even the news of her
cousin Ian's return disturbed her much.

One day the inevitable meeting came.  She was at Ranza-M√≤r, and when
a shadow came into the dairy where she was standing she looked up,
and saw Ian before her.  She thought he appeared taller and stronger
than ever, though still not so tall as Sheumais, who would appear
slim beside the Herculean Skye man.  But as she looked at his close
curling black hair and thick bull-neck and the sullen eyes in his
dark wind-red face, she wondered that she had ever tolerated him at
all.

He broke the ice at once.

"Tell me, Katreen, are you glad to see me back again?"

"I am glad that you are home once more safe and sound."

"And will you make it my home for me by coming to live with me, as
I've asked you again and again?"

"No: as I've told you again and again."

He gloomed at her angrily for a few moments before he resumed.

"I will be asking you this one thing, Katreen, daughter of my
father's brother: do you love that man Achanna who lives at
Ranza-beag?"

"You may ask the wind why it is from the east or the west, but it
won't tell you.  You're not the wind's master."

"If you think I will let this man take you away from me, you are
thinking a foolish thing."

"And you saying a foolisher."

"Ay?"

"Ay, sure.  What could you do, Ian Mhic Ian?  At the worst, you could
do no more than kill James Achanna.  What then?  I too would die.
You can not separate us.  I would not marry you, now, though you were
the last man in the world and I the last woman."

"You're a fool, Katreen Macarthur.  Your father has promised you to
me, and I tell you this: if you love Achanna you'll save his life
only by letting him go away from here.  I promise you he will not be
here long."

"Ay, you promise _me_; but you will not say that thing to James
Achanna's face.  You are a coward."

With a muttered oath the man turned on his heel.

"Let him beware o' me, and you, too, Katreen-mo-nighean-donn.  I
swear it by my mother's grave and by St. Martin's Cross that you will
be mine by hook or by crook."

The girl smiled scornfully.  Slowly she lifted a milk-pail.

"It would be a pity to waste the good milk, Ian-gorach, but if you
don't go it is I that will be emptying the pail on you, and then you
will be as white without as your heart is within."

"So you call me witless, do you?  _Ian-gorach_!  Well, we shall be
seeing as to that.  And as for the milk, there will be more than milk
spilt because of _you_, Katreen-donn."

From that day, though neither Sheumais nor Katreen knew of it, a
watch was set upon Achanna.

It could not be long before their secret was discovered, and it was
with a savage joy overmastering his sullen rage that Ian Macarthur
knew himself the discoverer, and conceived his double vengeance.  He
dreamed, gloatingly, on both the black thoughts that roamed like
ravenous beasts through the solitudes of his heart.  But he did not
dream that another man was filled with hate because of Katreen's
lover, another man who had sworn to make her his own, the man who,
disguised, was known in Armadale as Donald McLean, and in the north
isles would have been hailed as Gloom Achanna.

There had been steady rain for three days, with a cold, raw wind.  On
the fourth the sun shone, and set in peace.  An evening of quiet
beauty followed, warm, fragrant, dusky from the absence of moon or
star, though the thin veils of mist promised to disperse as the night
grew.

There were two men that eve in the undergrowth on the south side of
the lochlet.  Sheumais had come earlier than his wont.  Impatient for
the dusk, he could scarce await the waning of the afterglow; surely,
he thought, he might venture.  Suddenly his ears caught the sound of
cautious footsteps.  Could it be old Donald, perhaps with some
inkling of the way in which his daughter saw her lover in despite of
all; or, mayhap, might it be Ian Macarthur, tracking him as a hunter
stalking a stag by the water-pools?  He crouched, and waited.  In a
few minutes he saw Ian carefully picking his way.  The man stooped as
he descried the green branches; smiled as, with a low rustling, he
raised them from the ground.

Meanwhile yet another man watched and waited, though on the further
side of the lochan, where the hazel copses were.  Gloom Achanna half
hoped, half feared the approach of Katreen.  It would be sweet to see
her again, sweet to slay her lover before her eyes, brother to him
though he was.  But, there was the chance that she might descry him,
and, whether recognizingly or not, warn the swimmer.

So it was that he had come there before sundown, and now lay crouched
among the bracken underneath a projecting mossy ledge close upon the
water, where it could scarce be that she or any should see him.

As the gloaming deepened a great stillness reigned.  There was no
breath of wind.  A scarce audible sigh prevailed among the spires of
the heather.  The churring of a night-jar throbbed through the
darkness.  Somewhere a corncrake called its monotonous crek-craik;
the dull, harsh sound emphasizing the utter stillness.  The pinging
of the gnats hovering over and among the sedges made an incessant
murmur through the warm, sultry air.

There was a splash once as of a fish.  Then, silence.  Then a lower
but more continuous splash, or rather wash of water.  A slow susurrus
rustled through the dark.

Where he lay among the fern Gloom Achanna slowly raised his head,
stared through the shadows and listened intently.  If Katreen were
waiting there she was not near.

Noiselessly he slid into the water.  When he rose it was under a
clump of green branches.  These he had cut and secured three hours
before.  With his left hand he swam slowly, or kept his equipoise in
the water; with his right he guided the heavy rowan bough.  In his
mouth were two objects, one long and thin and dark, the other with an
occasional glitter as of a dead fish.

His motion was scarcely perceptible.  None the less he was near the
middle of the loch almost as soon as another clump of green branches.
Doubtless the swimmer beneath it was confident that he was now safe
from observation.

The two clumps of green branches drew nearer.  The smaller seemed a
mere estray, a spray blown down by the recent gale.  But all at once
the larger clump jerked awkwardly and stopped.  Simultaneously a
strange, low strain of music came from the other.

The strain ceased.  The two clumps of green branches remained
motionless.  Slowly, at last, the larger moved forward.  It was too
dark for the swimmer to see if any one lay hid behind the smaller.
When he reached it he thrust aside the leaves.

It was as though a great salmon leaped.  There was a splash, and a
narrow, dark body shot through the gloom.  At the end of it something
gleamed.  Then suddenly there was a savage struggle.  The inanimate
green branches tore this way and that, and surged and swirled.
Gasping cries came from the leaves.  Again and again the gleaming
thing leaped.  At the third leap an awful scream shrilled through the
silence.  The echo of it wailed thrice, with horrible distinctness,
in the corrie beyond Cnoc-an-Fhraoch.  Then, after a faint splashing,
there was silence once more.  One clump of green branches drifted
slowly up the lochlet.  The other moved steadily toward the place
whence, a brief while before, it had stirred.

Only one thing lived in the heart of Gloom Achanna--the joy of his
exultation.  He had killed his brother Sheumais.  He had always hated
him because of his beauty; of late he had hated him because he had
stood between him, Gloom, and Katreen Macarthur--because he had
become her lover.  They were all dead now except himself, all the
Achannas.  He was "Achanna."  When the day came that he would go back
to Galloway, there would be a magpie on the first birk, and a
screaming jay on the first rowan, and a croaking raven on the first
fir; ay, he would be their suffering, though they knew nothing of him
meanwhile!  He would be Achanna of Achanna again.  Let those who
would stand in his way beware.  As for Katreen: perhaps he would take
her there, perhaps not.  He smiled.

These thoughts were the wandering fires in his brain while he slowly
swam shoreward under the floating green branches, and as he
disengaged himself from them and crawled upward through the bracken.
It was at this moment that a third man entered the water from the
further shore.

Prepared as he was to come suddenly upon Katreen, Gloom was startled
when, in a place of dense shadow, a hand touched his shoulder, and
her voice whispered:

"Sheumais, Sheumais!"

The next moment she was in his arms.  He could feel her heart beating
against his side.

"What was it, Sheumais?  What was that awful cry?" she whispered.

For answer he put his lips to hers, and kissed her again and again.

The girl drew back.  Some vague instinct warned her.

"What is it, Sheumais?  Why don't you speak?"

He drew her close again.

"Pulse of my heart, it is I who love you, I who love you best of all;
it is I, Gloom Achanna!"

With a cry she struck him full in the face.  He staggered, and in
that moment she freed herself.

"You _coward_!"

"Katreen, I--"

"Come no nearer.  If you do, it will be the death of you!"

"The death o' me!  Ah, bonnie fool that you are, and is it you that
will be the death o' me?"

"Ay, Gloom Achanna, for I have but to scream and Sheumais will be
here, an' he would kill you like a dog if he knew you did me harm."

"Ah, but if there were no Sheumais, or any man to come between me an'
my will!"

"Then there would be a woman!  Ay, if you overbore me I would
strangle you with my hair, or fix my teeth in your false throat!"

"I was not for knowing you were such a wild-cat; but I'll tame you
yet, my lass!  Aha, wild-cat!"  And as he spoke he laughed low.

"It is a true word, Gloom of the black heart.  I am a wild-cat, and,
like a wild-cat, I am not to be seized by a fox; and that you will be
finding to your cost, by the holy St. Bridget!  But now, off with
you, brother of my man!"

"Your man--ha! ha!"

"Why do you laugh?"

"Sure, I am laughing at a warm, white lass like yourself having a
dead man as your lover!"

"A--dead--man?"

No answer came.  The girl shook with a new fear.  Slowly she drew
closer, till her breath fell warm against the face of the other.  He
spoke at last:

"Ay, a dead man."

"It is a lie."

"Where would you be that you were not hearing his good-by?  I'm
thinking it was loud enough!"

"It is a lie--it is a lie!"

"No, it is no lie.  Sheumais is cold enough now.  He's low among the
weeds by now.  Ay, by now: down there in the lochan."

"_What_--you, _you devil_!  Is it for killing your own brother you
would be?"

"I killed no one.  He died his own way.  Maybe the cramp took him.
Maybe--maybe a kelpie gripped him.  I watched.  I saw him beneath the
green branches.  He was dead before he died.  I saw it in the white
face o' him.  Then he sank.  He's dead.  Sheumais is dead.  Look
here, girl, I've always loved you.  I swore the oath upon you.
You're mine.  Sure, you're mine now, Katreen!  It is loving you I am!
It will be a south wind for you from this day, muirnean mochree!  See
here, I'll show you how I--"

"Back--back--_murderer_!"

"Be stopping that foolishness now, Katreen Macarthur!  By the Book, I
am tired of it.  I am loving you, and it's having you for mine I am!
And if you won't come to me like the dove to its mate, I'll come to
you like the hawk to the dove!"

With a spring he was upon her.  In vain she strove to beat him back.
His arms held her as a stoat grips a rabbit.

He pulled her head back, and kissed her throat till the strangulating
breath sobbed against his ear.  With a last despairing effort she
screamed the name of the dead man: "_Sheumais!  Sheumais!
Sheumais!_"  The man who struggled with her laughed.

"Ay, call away!  The herrin' will be coming through the bracken as
soon as Sheumais comes to your call!  Ah, it is mine you are now,
Katreen!  He's dead and cold--an' you'd best have a living man--an'--"

She fell back, her balance lost in the sudden releasing.  What did it
mean?  Gloom still stood there, but as one frozen.  Through the
darkness she saw, at last, that a hand gripped his shoulder; behind
him a black mass vaguely obtruded.

For some moments there was absolute silence.  Then a hoarse voice
came out of the dark:

"You will be knowing now who it is, Gloom Achanna!"

The voice was that of Sheumais, who lay dead in the lochan.  The
murderer shook as in a palsy.  With a great effort, slowly he turned
his head.  He saw a white splatch, the face of the corpse; in this
white splatch flamed two burning eyes, the eyes of the soul of the
brother whom he had slain.

He reeled, staggered as a blind man, and, free now of that awful
clasp, swayed to and fro as one drunken.

Slowly Sheumais raised an arm and pointed downward through the wood
toward the lochan.  Still pointing, he moved swiftly forward.

With a cry like a beast, Gloom Achanna swung to one side, stumbled,
rose, and leaped into the darkness.

For some minutes Sheumais and Katreen stood, silent, apart, listening
to the crashing sound of his flight--the race of the murderer against
the pursuing shadow of the Grave.




A BEWITCHED SHIP

BY W. CLARK RUSSELL

_William Clark Russell, the son of Henry Russell, the composer of
"Cheer, Boys, Cheer" and other songs, was born in New York in 1844.
At the age of thirteen he entered the British merchant service and
followed the sea till twenty-one, after which he devoted himself to
story-writing.  It is a common-place of criticism to say that no one
writes better sea stories than the author of the famous "Wreck of the
Grosvenor."  Since 1890 he has lived at Bath, in the west of England.
The present story is taken from a volume entitled "On the Fo'k'sle
Head."_



A BEWITCHED SHIP

By W. CLARK RUSSELL

"About ten years ago," began my friend, Captain Green, "I went as
second mate of a ship named the 'Ocean King.'  She'd been an old
Indiaman in her time, and had a poop and topgallant forecastle,
though alterations had knocked some of the dignity out of her.  Her
channels had been changed into plates with dead-eyes above the rail,
and the eye missed the spread of the lower rigging that it naturally
sought in looking at a craft with a square stern and windows in it,
and checkered sides rounding out into curves, that made a complete
tub of the old hooker.  Yet, spite of changes, the old-fashioned
grace would break through.  She looked like a lady who has seen
better days, who has got to do work which servants did for her in the
times when she was well off, but who, let her set her hand to what
she will, makes you see that the breeding and the instincts are still
there, and that she's as little to be vulgarized by poverty and its
coarse struggles as she could be made a truer lady than she is by
money.  Ships, like human beings, have their careers, and the close
of some of them is strange, and sometimes hard, I think.

"The 'Ocean King' had been turned into a collier, and I went second
mate of her when she was full up with coal for a South African port.
Yet, this ship, that was now carrying one of the dirtiest cargoes you
could name, barring phosphate manure, had been reckoned in her day a
fine passenger vessel, a noble Indiaman indeed--her tonnage was
something over eleven hundred--with a cuddy fitted up royally.  Many
a freight of soldiers had she carried round the Cape, many an old
nabob had she conveyed--ay, and Indian potentates, who smoked out of
jeweled hookahs, and who were waited upon by crowds of black servants
in turbans and slippers.  I used to moralize over her just as I would
over a tomb, when I had the watch and was alone and could let my
thoughts run loose.

"The sumptuous cabin trappings were all gone, and I seemed to smell
coal in the wind, even when my head was over the weather side, and
when the breeze that blew along came fresh across a thousand miles of
sea; but there was a good deal of the fittings left--fittings which,
I don't doubt, made the newspapers give a long account of this 'fine,
great ship' when she was launched--quite enough of them to enable a
man to reconstruct a picture of the cuddy of the 'Ocean King' as it
was in the days of her glory, when the soft oil-lamps shone bright on
the draped tables and sparkled on silver and glass; when the old
skipper, sitting with the mizzenmast behind him, would look, with his
red face and white hair, down the rows of ladies and gentlemen eating
and drinking, stewards running about, trays hanging from the deck
above, and globes full of gold-fish swinging to the roll of the
vessel as she swung stately, with her stunsails hanging out, over the
long blue swell, wrinkled by the wind.  The ship is still afloat.
Where are the people she carried?  The crews who have worked her?
The captains who have commanded her?  There is nothing that should be
fuller of ghosts than an old ship; and I very well remember that when
I first visited the 'Victory,' at Portsmouth, and descended into her
cockpit, what I saw was not a well-preserved and cleanly length of
massive deck, but groups of wounded and bleeding and dying men
littering the dark floor, and the hatchway shadowed by groaning
figures handed below, while the smell of English, French, and Spanish
gunpowder, even down there, was so strong--phew!  I could have spat
the flavor out!

"Well, the old 'Ocean King' had once upon a time been said to be
haunted.  She had certainly been long enough afloat to own a hundred
stories, and she was so stanch and true that if ever a superstition
got into her there was no chance of its getting out again.  I only
remember one of these yarns; it was told to me by the dockmaster, who
had been at sea for many years, was an old man, and knew the history
of all such craft as the 'Ocean King.'  He said that, in '51, I think
it was, there had been a row among the crew: an Italian sailor
stabbed an Englishman, who bled to death.  To avenge the Englishman's
death the rest of the crew, who were chiefly English, thrust the
Italian into the forepeak and let him lie there in darkness.  When he
was asked for they reported that he had fallen overboard, and this
seems to have been believed.  Whether the crew meant to starve him or
not is not certain; but, after he had been in the forepeak three or
four days, a fellow going behind the galley out of the way of the
wind to light his pipe--it being then four bells in the first
watch--came running into the forecastle, with his hair on end, and
the sweat pouring off his face, swearing he had seen the Italian's
ghost.  This frightened the men prettily; some of them went down into
the forepeak, and found the Italian lying there dead, with a score of
rats upon him, which scampered off when the men dropped below.
During all the rest of the voyage his ghost was constantly seen,
sometimes at the lee wheel, sometimes astride of the flying-jibboom.
What was the end of it--I mean, whether the men confessed the murder,
and, if so, what became of them--the dockmaster said he didn't know.
But, be this as it may, I discovered shortly after we had begun our
voyage that the crew had got to hear of this story, and the chief
mate said it had been brought aboard by the carpenter, who had picked
it up from some of the dockyard laborers.

"I well recollect two uncomfortable circumstances; we sailed on a
Friday, and the able and ordinary seamen were thirteen in number, the
idlers and ourselves aft bringing up the ship's company to nineteen
souls! when, I suppose, in her prime the 'Ocean King' never left port
short of seventy or eighty seamen, not to mention stewards, cooks,
cooks' mates, butcher, butcher's mate, baker, and the rest of them.
But double topsail yards were now in; besides, I understood that the
vessel's masts had been reduced and her yards shortened, and we
carried stump fore and mizzen-topgallant masts.

"All being ready, a tug got hold of our tow-rope, and away we went
down the river and out to sea.

"I don't believe myself that any stories which had been told the men
about the ship impressed them much.  Sailors are very superstitious,
but they are not to be scared till something has happened to frighten
them.  Your merely telling them that there's a ghost aboard the ship
they're in won't alarm them till they've caught sight of the ghost.
But once let a man say to the others: 'There's a bloomin' sperrit in
this ship.  Lay your head agin the forehatch, and you'll hear him
gnashing his teeth and rattlin' his chains,' and then let another man
go and listen, and swear, and perhaps very honestly, that he 'heerd
the noises plain,' and you'll have all hands in a funk, talking in
whispers, and going aloft in the dark nervously.

"In our ship nothing happened for some days.  We were deep and slow,
and rolled along solemnly, the sea falling away from the vessel's
powerful round bows as from a rock.  Pile what we could upon her,
with tacks aboard, staysails drawing, and the wind hitting her best
sailing point, we could seldom manage to get more than seven knots
out of her.  One night I had the first watch.  It was about two
bells.  There was a nice wind, sea smooth, and a red moon crawling up
over our starboard beam.  We were under all plain sail, leaning away
from the wind a trifle, and the water washed along under the bends in
lines through which the starlight ran glimmering.

"I was thinking over the five or six months' voyages which old wagons
after the pattern of this ship took in getting to India, when, seeing
a squall coming along, I sung out for hands to stand by the
main-royal and mizzen-topgallant halliards.  It drove down dark, and
not knowing what was behind I ordered the main-royal to be clewed up
and furled.  Two youngsters went aloft.  By the time they were on the
yard the squall thinned, but I fancied there was another bearing
down, and thought it best to let the ordinary seamen roll the sail
up.  On a sudden down they both trotted, hand over hand, leaving the
sail flapping in the clutch of the clew-lines.

"I roared out: 'What d'ye mean by coming down before you've furled
that sail?'

"They stood together in the main rigging, and one of them answered:
'Please, sir, there's a ghost somewhere up aloft on the
foretopsail-yard.'

"'A ghost, you fool!' I cried.

"'Yes, sir,' he answered.  'He says: "Jim, your mother wants yer."  I
says: "What?" and he says: "Your mother wants yer," in the hollowest
o' voices.  Dick here heard it.  There's no one aloft forrard, sir.'

"I sung out to them to jump aloft again, and finding that they didn't
move I made a spring, on which they dropped like lightning on deck,
and began to beg and pray of me in the eagerest manner not to send
them aloft, as they were too frightened to hold on.  Indeed, the
fellow named Jim actually began to shiver and cry when I threatened
him; so as the royal had to be furled I sent an able seaman aloft,
who, after rolling up the sail, came down and said that no voice had
called to him, and that he rather reckoned it was a bit of skylarking
on the part of the boys to get out of stowing the sail.  However, I
noticed that the man was wonderfully quick over the job, and that
afterward the watch on deck stood talking in low voices in the waist.

"Jim was a fool of a youth, but Dick was a smart lad, aged about
nineteen, and good-looking, with a lively tongue, and I heard
afterward that he could spin a yarn to perfection all out of his
imagination.  I called him to me, and asked him if he had really
heard a voice, and he swore he had.

"'Did it say,' said I, 'Jim, your mother wants you?'

"'Ay, sir,' he answered, with a bit of a shudder, 'as plain as you
yourself say it.  It seemed to come off the foretop-gallant yard,
where I fancied I see something dark a-moving, but I was too
frightened to take particular notice.'

"Well, it was not long after this, about eleven o'clock in the
morning, that, the captain being on deck, the cook steps out of the
galley, comes walking along the poop, and going up to the skipper
touches his cap, and stands looking at him.

"'What d'ye want?' said the captain, eying him as if he took him to
be mad.

"'Didn't you call, sir?' says the cook.

"'Call!' cries the skipper.  'Certainly not.'

"The man looked stupid with surprise, and, muttering something to
himself, went forward.  Ten minutes after he came up again to the
skipper, and says: 'Yes, sir!' as a man might who answers to a call.
The skipper began to swear at him, and called him a lunatic, and so
on; but the man, finding he was wrong again, grew white, and swore
that if he was on his death-bed he'd maintain that the captain had
called him twice.

"The skipper, who was a rather nervous man, turned to me, and said:
'What do you make of this, Mr. Green?  I can't doubt the cook's word.
Who's calling him in my voice?'

"'Oh, it's some illusion, sir,' said I, feeling puzzled for all that.

"But the cook, with the tears actually standing in his eyes, declared
it was no illusion; he'd know the captain's voice if it was nine
miles off.  And he then walked in a dazed way toward the forecastle,
singing out that whether the voice he had heard belonged to a ghost
or a Christian man, it might go on calling 'Cook!' for the next
twenty years without his taking further notice of it.  This thing,
coming so soon after the call to Jim that had so greatly alarmed the
two ordinary seamen, made a great impression on the crew; and I never
regret anything more than that my position should have prevented me
from getting into their confidence, and learning their thoughts, for
there is no doubt I should have stowed away memories enough to serve
me for many a hearty laugh in after years.

"A few days rolled by without anything particular happening.  One
night it came to my turn to have the first watch.  It was a quiet
night, with wind enough to keep the sails still while the old ship
went drowsily rolling along her course to the African port.  Suddenly
I heard a commotion forward, and fearing that some accident had
happened, I called out to know what the matter was.  A voice
answered: 'Ghost or no ghost, there's somebody a-talking in the
forehold; come and listen, sir.'  The silence that followed suggested
a good deal of alarm.  I sang out as I approached the men, 'Perhaps
there's a stowaway below.'

"'It's no living voice,' was the reply; 'it sounds as if it comes
from a skelington.'

"I found a crowd of men standing in awed postures near the hatch, and
the most frightened of all looked to me to be the ordinary seaman
Dick, who had backed away on the other side of the hatch, and stood
looking on, leaning with his hands on his knees, and staring as if he
were fascinated.  I waited a couple or three minutes, which, in a
business of this kind, seems a long time, and, hearing nothing, I was
going to ridicule the men for their nervousness, when a hollow voice
under the hatch said distinctly, 'It's a terrible thing to be a ghost
and not be able to get out.'

"I was greatly startled, and ran aft to tell the captain, who agreed
with me that there must be a stowaway in the hold, and that he had
gone mad.  We both went forward, and the hatch was lifted, and we
looked on top of the coal; and I was then about to ask some of the
men to join me in a search in the forepeak, for upon my word I had no
taste single-handed for a job of that kind at such a moment, when the
voice said, 'There's no use looking, you'll never find me.  I'm not
to be seen.'

"'Confound me!' cried the skipper, polishing his forehead with a
pocket-handkerchief, 'if ever I heard of such a thing.  I'll tell you
what it is,' he shouted, looking into the hatch, 'dead men can't
talk, and so, as you're bound to be alive, you'd better come up out
of that, and smartly too--d'ye hear?--or you'll find this the worst
attempt at skylarking that was ever made.'

"There was a short silence, and you'd see all hands straining their
ears, for there was light enough for that, given out by a lantern one
of the men held.

"'You couldn't catch me because you couldn't see me,' said the voice
in a die-away tone, and this time it came from the direction of the
main hatch, as though it had flitted aft.

"'Well,' says the captain, 'may I be jiggered!' and without another
word he walked away on to the poop.

"I told the men to clap the hatches on again, and they did this in
double-quick time, evidently afraid that the ghost might pop up out
of the hold if they didn't mind their eye.

"All this made us very superstitious, from the captain down to the
boys.  We talked it over in the cabin, and the mate was incredulous,
and disposed to ridicule me.

"'Any way,' said he, 'it's strange that this voice is only heard in
your watch.  It's never favored me with any remarks.  The creaking
and groaning of an old wooden ship is often like spoken words, and
what you've been hearing may be nothing but a deception of the ear.'

"'A deception in your eye,' cried the skipper.  'The timbers of an
old wooden ship may strain and creak in the Dutch language, but hang
me if they ever talked good, sensible English.  However, I'm not
going to worry.  For my part,' said he, with a nervous glance around
him, 'I don't believe in ghosts; whatever it is that's talking in the
hold may go on jawing, so long as he sticks to that, and don't
frighten the men with an ugly mug, nor come upon us for a man's
allowance.'

"'If it's anybody's ghost,' said I, 'it must be the Italian's, the
chap that was starved in the forepeak.'

"'I doubt that,' said the skipper.  'I didn't detect anything foreign
in what he said.  To my ear it sounded more like Whitechapel than
Italiano.'

"Well, for another week we heard little more of the ghost.  It's true
that one middle watch a chap I had sent aloft to loose the main-royal
had hardly stepped out of the lower rigging, after lingering in the
crosstrees to overhaul his clew-lines, when he comes rushing up to me
and cries out, 'I've been hailed from aloft, sir! a voice has just
sung out, "Tommy, jump aloft again that I may have a good look at
you!"'

"'Who's up there?' I asked him, staring into the gloom where the mast
and yards went towering.

"'There's no one up there, sir; I'll swear it.  I was bound to see
him had any one been there,' he answered, evidently very much
frightened.

"It occurred to me that some one of the crew might be lying hid in
the top, and that if I could catch him I might find out who the ghost
was.  So I jumped into the rigging and trotted aloft, keeping my eye
on the lee rigging, to make sure that no one descended by it.  I
gained the top, but nobody was there.  I mounted to the crosstrees,
but the deuce a sign of any one could I see.  I came down, feeling
both foolish and scared; for you see I had heard the voice myself in
the hold; there was no question that there was a voice, belonging to
nobody knew what, knocking about the ship, and consequently it was
now impossible to help believing a man when he said he heard it.

"However, it was necessary to keep the men in heart, and this was not
to be done by captain and mates appearing scared; so I reasoned a bit
with the man, told him that there were no such things as ghosts, that
a voice was bound to come from a live person, because a spectre
couldn't possibly have lungs, those organs being of a perishable
nature, and then sent him forward, but no easier in his mind, I
suspect, than I was.  Anyhow, I was glad when eight bells struck and
it was my turn to go below.  But, as I have said, nothing much came
of this--at least, nothing that reached my ears.  But not many nights
following the ship lay becalmed--there wasn't a breath of air, and
the sea lay smooth as polished jet.  This time I had the middle watch
again.  I was walking quietly up and down the poop, on the lookout
for a deeper shadow upon the sea to indicate the approach of wind,
when a man came up the ladder and said, 'There's some one a-talking
to the ship under the bows.'

"'Are you awake?' said I.

"'Heaven help me, as I stand here, sir,' exclaimed the fellow,
solemnly, 'if that there woice which talked in the hold t'other day
ain't now over the side.'

"I ran forward, and found most of the watch huddled together near the
starboard cathead.  I peered over, and there was a dead silence.

"'What are you looking over that side for?  I'm here!' said a thin,
faint voice, that seemed more in the air than in the sea.

"There!' exclaimed one of the seamen, in a hoarse whisper, 'that's
the third time.  Whichever side we look, he's on the other.'

"'But there must be some one in the water,' said another man.
'Anybody see his houtline? cuss me if I couldn't swear I see a chap
swimmin' just now.'

"'No, no,' answered some one, gruffly, 'nothing but phosphorus, Joe,
and the right sort o' stuff, too, for if this ain't old Nick--'

"'You're a liar, Sam!' came the voice clear, and, as one could swear,
plain from over the side.

"There was a general recoil, and a sort of groan ran among the men.

"At the same moment I collared a figure standing near me, and slued
him round to bring his face fair to the starlight, clear of the
staysail.  'Come you along with me, Master Dick,' said I; and I
marched him off the forecastle, along the main deck, and up on to the
poop.  'So _you're_ the ghost, eh?' said I.  'Why, to have kept your
secret you should have given my elbow a wider berth.  No wonder the
voice only makes observations in my watch.  You're too lazy, I
suppose, to leave your hammock to try your wonderful power on the
mate, eh?  Now see here,' said I, finding him silent, and noticing
how white his face glimmered to the stars, 'I know you're the man, so
you'd better confess.  Own the truth and I'll keep your secret,
providing you belay all further tricks of the same kind; deny that
you're the ghost and I'll speak to the captain and set the men upon
you.'

"This fairly frightened him.  'Well, sir, it's true; I'm the voice,
sir; but for God's sake keep the secret, sir.  The men 'ud have my
life if they found out that it was me as scared them.'

"This confession was what I needed, for though when standing pretty
close to him on the forecastle I could have sworn that it was he who
uttered the words which perplexed and awed the sailors, yet so
perfect was the deception, so fine, in short, was his skill as a
ventriloquist that, had he stoutly denied and gone on denying that he
was the 'voice,' I should have believed him and continued sharing in
the wonder and superstition of the crew.  I kept his secret as I
promised; but, somehow or other, it leaked out in time that he could
deceive the ear by apparently pitching his voice among the rigging,
or under the deck, or over the side, though the discovery was not
made until the 'ghost' had for a long time ceased to trouble the
ship's company, and until the men's superstitious awe had faded
somewhat, and they had recovered their old cheerfulness.  We then
sent for Dick to the cabin, where he gave us a real entertainment as
a ventriloquist, imitating all sorts of animals, and producing sounds
as of women in distress and men singing out for help, in the berths;
indeed, such was the skill that I'd often see the skipper and mate
turning startled to look in the direction whence the voices proceeded.

"He made his peace with the men by amusing them in the same way; so
that, instead of getting the rope's ending aft and the pummeling
forward which he deserved, he ended as a real and general favorite,
and one of the most amusing fellows that a man ever was shipmate
with.  I used to tell him that if he chose to perform ashore, he was
sure to make plenty of money, since such ventriloquial powers as his
was the rarest thing in the world; and I'd sometimes fancy he meant
to take my advice.  But whether he died or kept on going to sea I
don't know, for after he left the ship I never saw nor heard of him
again."




THE SIGNAL-MAN

BY CHARLES DICKENS

_Charles Dickens (born 1812, died 1870) has been acknowledged as the
creator of the modern novel.  Says David Christie Murray, a popular
novelist: "There is not a writer of fiction at this hour, in any land
where fiction is a recognized trade or art, who is not, whether he
knows it and owns it, or no, largely influenced by Dickens."_

_"The Signal-Man" has been frequently selected by critics as an
example of Dickens's ability with the short-story form._



THE SIGNAL-MAN

By CHARLES DICKENS

"Halloa!  Below there!"

When he heard a voice thus calling to him, he was standing at the
door of his box, with a flag in his hand, furled round its short
pole.  One would have thought, considering the nature of the ground,
that he could not have doubted from what quarter the voice came; but
instead of looking up to where I stood on the top of the steep
cutting nearly over his head, he turned himself about, and looked
down the Line.  There was something remarkable in his manner of doing
so, though I could not have said for my life what.  But I know it was
remarkable enough to attract my notice, even though his figure was
foreshortened and shadowed, down in the deep trench, and mine was
high above him, so steeped in the glow of an angry sunset that I had
shaded my eyes with my hand before I saw him at all.

"Halloa!  Below!"

From looking down the Line, he turned himself about again, and,
raising his eyes, saw my figure high above him.

"Is there any path by which I can come down and speak to you?"

He looked up at me without replying, and I at him without pressing
him too soon with a repetition of my idle question.  Just then there
came a vague vibration in the earth and air, quickly changing into a
violent pulsation, and an oncoming rush that caused me to start back,
as though it had force to draw me down.  When such vapor as rose to
my height from this rapid train had passed me, and was skimming away
over the landscape, I looked down again, and saw him refurling the
flag he had shown while the train went by.

I repeated my inquiry.  After a pause, during which he seemed to
regard me with fixed attention, he motioned with his rolled-up flag
toward a point on my level, some two or three hundred yards distant.
I called down to him, "All right!" and made for that point.  There,
by dint of looking closely about me, I found a rough zigzag
descending path notched out, which I followed.

The cutting was extremely deep, and unusually precipitate.  It was
made through a clammy stone, that became oozier and wetter as I went
down.  For these reasons, I found the way long enough to give me time
to recall a singular air of reluctance or compulsion with which he
had pointed out the path.

When I came down low enough upon the zigzag descent to see him again,
I saw that he was standing between the rails on the way by which the
train had lately passed, in an attitude as if he were waiting for me
to appear.  He had his left hand at his chin, and that left elbow
rested on his right hand, crossed over his breast.  His attitude was
one of such expectation and watchfulness that I stopped a moment,
wondering at it.

I resumed my downward way, and stepping out upon the level of the
railroad, and drawing nearer to him, saw that he was a dark, sallow
man, with a dark beard and rather heavy eyebrows.  His post was in as
solitary and dismal a place as ever I saw.  On either side, a
dripping-wet wall of jagged stone, excluding all view but a strip of
sky; the perspective one way only a crooked prolongation of this
great dungeon; the shorter perspective in the other direction
terminating in a gloomy red light, and the gloomier entrance to a
black tunnel, in whose massive architecture there was a barbarous,
depressing, and forbidding air.  So little sunlight ever found its
way to this spot that it had an earthy, deadly smell; and so much
cold wind rushed through it that it struck chill to me, as if I had
left the natural world.

Before he stirred, I was near enough to him to have touched him.  Not
even then removing his eyes from mine, he stepped back one step, and
lifted his hand.

This was a lonesome post to occupy (I said), and it had riveted my
attention when I looked down from up yonder.  A visitor was a rarity,
I should suppose; not an unwelcome rarity, I hoped?  In me, he merely
saw a man who had been shut up within narrow limits all his life, and
who, being at last set free, had a newly-awakened interest in these
great works.  To such purpose I spoke to him; but I am far from sure
of the terms I used; for, besides that I am not happy in opening any
conversation, there was something in the man that daunted me.

He directed a most curious look toward the red light near the
tunnel's mouth, and looked all about it, as if something were missing
from it, and then looked at me.

That light was part of his charge?  Was it not?

He answered in a low voice: "Don't you know it is?"

The monstrous thought came into my mind, as I perused the fixed eyes
and the saturnine face, that this was a spirit, not a man.  I have
speculated since, whether there may have been infection in his mind.

In my turn, I stepped back.  But in making the action, I detected in
his eyes some latent fear of me.  This put the monstrous thought to
flight.

"You look at me," I said, forcing a smile, "as if you had a dread of
me."

"I was doubtful," he returned, "whether I had seen you before."

"Where?"

He pointed to the red light he had looked at.

"There?" I said.

Intently watchful of me, he replied (but without sound), "Yes."

"My good fellow, what should I do there?  However, be that as it may,
I never was there, you may swear."

"I think I may," he rejoined.  "Yes; I am sure I may,"

His manner cleared, like my own.  He replied to my remarks with
readiness, and in well-chosen words.  Had he much to do there?  Yes;
that was to say, he had enough responsibility to bear; but exactness
and watchfulness were what was required of him, and of actual
work--manual labor--he had next to none.  To change that signal, to
trim those lights, and to turn this iron handle now and then, was all
he had to do under that head.  Regarding those many long and lonely
hours of which I seemed to make so much, he could only say that the
routine of his life had shaped itself into that form, and he had
grown used to it.  He had taught himself a language down here--if
only to know by sight, and to have formed his own crude ideas of its
pronunciation, could be called learning it.  He had also worked at
fractions and decimals, and tried a little algebra; but he was, and
had been as a boy, a poor hand at figures.  Was it necessary for him
when on duty always to remain in that channel of damp air, and could
he never rise into the sunshine from between those high stone walls?
Why, that depended upon times and circumstances.  Under some
conditions there would be less upon the Line than under others, and
the same held good as to certain hours of the day and night.  In
bright weather, he did choose occasions for getting a little above
these lower shadows; but, being at all times liable to be called by
his electric bell, and at such times listening for it with redoubled
anxiety, the relief was less than I would suppose.

He took me into his box, where there was a fire, a desk for an
official book in which he had to make certain entries, a telegraphic
instrument with its dial, face, and needles, and the little bell of
which he had spoken.  On my trusting that he would excuse the remark
that he had been well educated, and (I hoped I might say without
offense), perhaps educated above that station, he observed that
instances of slight incongruity in such wise would rarely be found
wanting among large bodies of men; that he had heard it was so in
workhouses, in the police force, even in that last desperate
resource, the army; and that he knew it was so, more or less, in any
great railway staff.  He had been, when young (if I could believe it,
sitting in that hut--he scarcely could), a student of natural
philosophy, and had attended lectures; but he had run wild, misused
his opportunities, gone down, and never risen again.  He had no
complaint to offer about that.  He had made his bed, and he lay upon
it.  It was far too late to make another.

All that I have here condensed he said in a quiet manner, with his
grave dark regards divided between me and the fire.  He threw in the
word, "Sir," from time to time, and especially when he referred to
his youth--as though to request me to understand that he claimed to
be nothing but what I found him.  He was several times interrupted by
the little bell, and had to read off messages, and send replies.
Once he had to stand without the door, and display a flag as a train
passed, and make some verbal communication to the driver.  In the
discharge of his duties, I observed him to be remarkably exact and
vigilant, breaking off his discourse at a syllable, and remaining
silent until what he had to do was done.

In a word, I should have set this man down as one of the safest of
men to be employed in that capacity, but for the circumstance that
while he was speaking to me he twice broke off with a fallen color,
turned his face toward the little bell when it did not ring, opened
the door of the hut (which was kept shut to exclude the unhealthy
damp), and looked out toward the red light near the mouth of the
tunnel.  On both of those occasions, he came back to the fire with
the inexplicable air upon him which I had remarked, without being
able to define, when we were so far asunder.

Said I, when I rose to leave him, "You almost make me think that I
have met with a contented man."

(I am afraid I must acknowledge that I said it to lead him on.)

"I believe I used to be so," he rejoined, in the low voice in which
he had first spoken; "but I am troubled, sir, I am troubled."

He would have recalled the words if he could.  He had said them,
however, and I took them up quickly.

"With what?  What is your trouble?"

"It is very difficult to impart, sir.  It is very, very difficult to
speak of.  If ever you make me another visit, I will try to tell you."

"But I expressly intend to make you another visit.  Say, when shall
it be?"

"I go off early in the morning, and I shall be on again at ten
to-morrow night, sir."

"I will come at eleven."

He thanked me, and went out at the door with me.  "I'll show my white
light, sir," he said, in his peculiar low voice, "till you have found
the way up.  When you have found it, don't call out!  And when you
are at the top, don't call out!"

His manner seemed to make the place strike colder to me, but I said
no more than, "Very well."

"And when you come down to-morrow night, don't call out!  Let me ask
you a parting question.  What made you cry, 'Halloa!  Below there!'
to-night?"

"Heaven knows," said I.  "I cried something to that effect--"

"Not to that effect, sir.  Those were the very words.  I know them
well."

"Admit those were the very words.  I said them, no doubt, because I
saw you below."

"For no other reason?"

"What other reason could I possibly have?"

"You had no feeling that they were conveyed to you in any
supernatural way?"

"No."

He wished me good-night, and held up his light.  I walked by the side
of the down Line of rails (with a very disagreeable sensation of a
train coming behind me) until I found the path.  It was easier to
mount than to descend, and I got back to my inn without any adventure.

Punctual to my appointment, I placed my foot on the first notch of
the zigzag next night, as the distant clocks were striking eleven.
He was waiting for me at the bottom, with his white light on.  "I
have not called out," I said, when we came close together; "may I
speak now?"

"By all means, sir."

"Good-night, then, and here's my hand."

"Good-night, sir, and here's mine."

With that we walked side by side to his box, entered it, closed the
door, and sat down by the fire.

"I have made up my mind, sir," he began, bending forward as soon as
we were seated, and speaking in a tone but a little above a whisper,
"that you shall not have to ask me twice what troubles me.  I took
you for some one else, yesterday evening.  That troubles me."

"That mistake?"

"No.  That some one else."

"Who is it?"

"I don't know."

"Like me?"

"I don't know.  I never saw the face.  The left arm is across the
face, and the right arm is waved--violently waved.  This way."

I followed his action with my eyes, and it was the action of an arm
gesticulating, with the utmost passion and vehemence:

"For God's sake, clear the way!"

"One moonlight night," said the man, "I was sitting here, when I
heard a voice cry, 'Halloa!  Below there!'  I started up, looked from
that door, and saw this Some one else standing by the red light near
the tunnel, waving as I just now showed you.  The voice seemed hoarse
with shouting, and it cried, 'Look out!  Look out!'  And then again,
'Halloa!  Below there!  Look out!'  I caught up my lamp, turned it on
red, and ran toward the figure, calling, 'What's wrong?  What has
happened?  Where?'  It stood just outside the blackness of the
tunnel.  I advanced so close upon it that I wondered at its keeping
the sleeve across its eyes.  I ran right up at it, and had my hand
stretched out to pull the sleeve away, when it was gone."

"Into the tunnel?" said I.

"No.  I ran on into the tunnel, five hundred yards.  I stopped, and
held my lamp above my head, and saw the figures of the measured
distance, and saw the wet stains stealing down the walls and
trickling through the arch.  I ran out again faster than I had run in
(for I had a mortal abhorrence of the place upon me), and I looked
all round the red light with my own red light, and I went up the iron
ladder to the gallery atop of it, and I came down again, and ran back
here.  I telegraphed both ways, 'An alarm has been given.  Is
anything wrong?'  The answer came back, both ways, 'All well.'"

Resisting the slow touch of a frozen finger tracing out my spine, I
showed him how that this figure must be a deception of his sense of
sight; and how that figures, originating in disease of the delicate
nerves that minister to the functions of the eye, were known to have
often troubled patients, some of whom had become conscious of the
nature of their affliction, and had even proved it by experiments
upon themselves.  "As to an imaginary cry," said I, "do but listen
for a moment to the wind in this unnatural valley while we speak so
low, and to the wild harp it makes of the telegraph wires."

That was all very well, he returned, after we had sat listening for a
while, and he ought to know something of the wind and the wires--he
who so often passed long winter nights there, alone and watching.
But he would beg to remark that he had not finished.

I asked his pardon, and he slowly added these words, touching my arm:

"Within six hours after the Appearance, the memorable accident on
this Line happened, and within ten hours the dead and wounded were
brought along through the tunnel over the spot where the figure had
stood."

A disagreeable shudder crept over me, but I did my best against it.
It was not to be denied, I rejoined, that this was a remarkable
coincidence, calculated deeply to impress his mind.  But it was
unquestionable that remarkable coincidences did continually occur,
and they must be taken into account in dealing with such a subject.
Though to be sure I must admit, I added (for I thought I saw that he
was going to bring the objection to bear upon me), men of common
sense did not allow much for coincidences in making the ordinary
calculations of life.

He again begged to remark that he had not finished.

I again begged his pardon for being betrayed into interruptions.

"This," he said, again laying his hand upon my arm, and glancing over
his shoulder with hollow eyes, "was just a year ago.  Six or seven
months passed, and I had recovered from the surprise and shock, when
one morning, as the day was breaking, I, standing at the door, looked
toward the red light, and saw the spectre again."  He stopped, with a
fixed look at me.

"Did it cry out?"

"No.  It was silent."

"Did it wave its arm?"

"No.  It leaned against the shaft of the light, with both hands
before the face.  Like this."

Once more I followed his action with my eyes.  It was an action of
mourning.  I have seen such an attitude in stone figures on tombs.

"Did you go up to it?"

"I came in and sat down, partly to collect my thoughts, partly
because it had turned me faint.  When I went to the door again,
daylight was above me, and the ghost was gone."

"But nothing followed?  Nothing came of this?"

He touched me on the arm with his forefinger twice or thrice, giving
a ghastly nod each time.

"That very day, as a train came out of the tunnel, I noticed, at a
carriage window on my side, what looked like a confusion of hands and
heads, and something waved.  I saw it just in time to signal the
driver, Stop!  He shut off, and put his brake on, but the train
drifted past here a hundred and fifty yards or more.  I ran after it,
and, as I went along, heard terrible screams and cries.  A beautiful
young lady had died instantaneously in one of the compartments, and
was brought in here, and laid down on this floor between us."

Involuntarily I pushed my chair back, as I looked from the boards at
which he pointed to himself.

"True, sir.  True.  Precisely as it happened, so I tell it you."

I could think of nothing to say, to any purpose, and my mouth was
very dry.  The wind and the wires took up the story with a long
lamenting wail.

He resumed.  "Now, sir, mark this, and judge how my mind is troubled.
The spectre came back a week ago.  Ever since, it has been there, now
and again, by fits and starts."

"At the light?"

"At the Danger-light."

"What does it seem to do?"

He repeated, if possible with increased passion and vehemence, that
former gesticulation of, "For God's sake, clear the way!"

Then he went on.  "I have no peace or rest for it.  It calls to me,
for many minutes together, in an agonized manner, 'Below there!  Look
out!  Look out!'  It stands waving to me.  It rings my little bell--"

I caught at that.

"Did it ring your bell yesterday evening when I was here, and you
went to the door?"

"Twice."

"Why, see," said I, "how your imagination misleads you.  My eyes were
on the bell, and my ears were open to the bell, and if I am a living
man, it did not ring at those times.  No, nor at any other time,
except when it was rung in the natural course of physical things by
the station communicating with you."

He shook his head.  "I have never made a mistake as to that yet, sir.
I have never confused the spectre's ring with the man's.  The ghost's
ring is a strange vibration in the bell that it derives from nothing
else, and I have not asserted that the bell stirs to the eye.  I
don't wonder that you failed to hear it.  But _I_ heard it."

"And did the spectre seem to be there, when you looked out?"

"It was there."

"Both times?"

He repeated firmly: "Both times."

"Will you come to the door with me, and look for it now?"

He bit his under lip as though he were somewhat unwilling, but arose.
I opened the door, and stood on the step, while he stood in the
doorway.  There was the Danger-light.  There was the dismal mouth of
the tunnel.  There were the high, wet stone walls of the cutting.
There were the stars above them.

"Do you see it?" I asked him, taking particular note of his face.
His eyes were prominent and strained, but not very much more so,
perhaps, than my own had been when I had directed them earnestly
toward the same spot.

"No," he answered.  "It is not there."

"Agreed," said I.

We went in again, shut the door, and resumed our seats.  I was
thinking how best to improve this advantage, if it might be called
one, when he took up the conversation in such a matter-of-course way,
so assuming that there could be no serious question of fact between
us, that I felt myself placed in the weakest of positions.

"By this time you will fully understand, sir," he said, "that what
troubles me so dreadfully is the question, What does the spectre
mean?"

I was not sure, I told him, that I did fully understand.

"What is its warning against?" he said, ruminating, with his eyes on
the fire, and only by times turning them on me.  "What is the danger?
Where is the danger?  There is danger overhanging somewhere on the
Line.  Some dreadful calamity will happen.  It is not to be doubted
this third time, after what has gone before.  But surely this is a
cruel haunting of _me_.  What can I do?"

He pulled out his handkerchief, and wiped the drops from his heated
forehead.

"If I telegraph Danger, on either side of me, or on both, I can give
no reason for it," he went on, wiping the palms of his hands.  "I
should get into trouble, and do no good.  They would think I was mad.
This is the way it would work--Message: 'Danger!  Take care!'
Answer: 'What Danger?  Where?'  Message: 'Don't know.  But, for God's
sake, take care!'  They would displace me.  What else could they do?"

His pain of mind was most pitiable to see.  It was the mental torture
of a conscientious man, oppressed beyond endurance by an
unintelligible responsibility involving life.

"When it first stood under the Danger-light," he went on, putting his
dark hair back from his head, and drawing his hands outward across
and across his temples in an extremity of feverish distress, "why not
tell me where that accident was to happen--if it must happen?  Why
not tell me how it could be averted--if it could have been averted?
When on its second coming it hid its face, why not tell me, instead,
'She is going to die.  Let them keep her at home'?  If it came, on
those two occasions, only to show me that its warnings were true, and
so to prepare me for the third, why not warn me plainly now?  And I,
Lord help me! a mere poor signal-man on this solitary station!  Why
not go to somebody with credit to be believed, and power to act?"

When I saw him in this state, I saw that for the poor man's sake, as
well as for the public safety, what I had to do for the time was to
compose his mind.  Therefore, setting aside all question of reality
or unreality between us, I represented to him that whoever thoroughly
discharged his duty must do well, and that at least it was his
comfort that he understood his duty, though he did not understand
these confounding Appearances.  In this effort I succeeded far better
than in the attempt to reason him out of his conviction.  He became
calm; the occupations incidental to his post as the night advanced
began to make larger demands on his attention: and I left him at two
in the morning.  I had offered to stay through the night, but he
would not hear of it.

That I more than once looked back at the red light as I ascended the
pathway, that I did not like the red light, and that I should have
slept but poorly if my bed had been under it, I see no reason to
conceal.  Nor did I like the two sequences of the accident and the
dead girl.  I see no reason to conceal that either.

But what ran most in my thoughts was the consideration how ought I to
act, having become the recipient of this disclosure?  I had proved
the man to be intelligent, vigilant, painstaking, and exact; but how
long might he remain so, in his state of mind?  Though in a
subordinate position, still he held a most important trust, and would
I (for instance) like to stake my own life on the chances of his
continuing to execute it with precision?

Unable to overcome a feeling that there would be something
treacherous in my communicating what he had told me to his superiors
in the Company, without first being plain with himself and proposing
a middle course to him, I ultimately resolved to offer to accompany
him (otherwise keeping his secret for the present) to the wisest
medical practitioner we could hear of in those parts, and to take his
opinion.  A change in his time of duty would come round next night,
he had apprised me, and he would be off an hour or two after sunrise,
and on again soon after sunset.  I had appointed to return
accordingly.

Next evening was a lovely evening, and I walked out early to enjoy
it.  The sun was not yet quite down when I traversed the field-path
near the top of the deep cutting.  I would extend my walk for an
hour, I said to myself, half an hour on and half an hour back, and it
would then be time to go to my signal-man's box.

Before pursuing my stroll, I stepped to the brink, and mechanically
looked down, from the point from which I had first seen him.  I can
not describe the thrill that seized upon me, when, close at the mouth
of the tunnel, I saw the appearance of a man, with his left sleeve
across his eyes, passionately waving his right arm.

The nameless horror that oppressed me passed in a moment, for in a
moment I saw that this appearance of a man was a man indeed, and that
there was a little group of other men, standing at a short distance,
to whom he seemed to be rehearsing the gesture he made.  The
Danger-light was not yet lighted.  Against its shaft, a little low
hut, entirely new to me, had been made of some wooden supports and
tarpaulin.  It looked no bigger than a bed.

With an irresistible sense that something was wrong--with a flashing
self-reproachful fear that fatal mischief had come of my leaving the
man there, and causing no one to be sent to overlook or correct what
he did--I descended the notched path with all the speed I could make.

"What is the matter?" I asked the men.

"Signal-man killed this morning, sir."

"Not the man belonging to that box?"

"Yes, sir."

"Not the man I know?"

"You will recognize him, sir, if you knew him," said the man who
spoke for the others, solemnly uncovering his own head, and raising
an end of the tarpaulin, "for his face is quite composed."

"Oh, how did this happen, how did this happen?" I asked, turning from
one to another as the hut closed in again.

"He was cut down by an engine, sir.  No man in England knew his work
better.  But somehow he was not clear of the outer rail.  It was just
at broad day.  He had struck the light, and had the lamp in his hand.
As the engine came out of the tunnel, his back was toward her, and
she cut him down.  That man drove her, and was showing how it
happened.  Show the gentleman, Tom."

The man, who wore a rough dark dress, stepped back to his former
place at the mouth of the tunnel.

"Coming round the curve in the tunnel, sir," he said, "I saw him at
the end, like as if I saw him down a perspective-glass.  There was no
time to check speed, and I knew him to be very careful.  As he didn't
seem to take heed of the whistle, I shut it off when we were running
down upon him, and called to him as loud as I could call."

"What did you say?"

"I said, 'Below there!  Look out!  Look out!  For God's sake, clear
the way!'"

I started.

"Ah! it was a dreadful time, sir.  I never left off calling to him.
I put this arm before my eyes not to see, and I waved this arm to the
last; but it was no use."

. . . . . . . . . . . .

Without prolonging the narrative to dwell on any one of its curious
circumstances more than on any other, I may, in closing it, point out
the coincidence that the warning of the engine-driver included, not
only the words which the unfortunate signal-man had repeated to me as
haunting him, but also the words which I myself--not he--had
attached, and that only in my own mind, to the gesticulation he
imitated.




THE FOUR-FIFTEEN EXPRESS

BY AMELIA B. EDWARDS

_Amelia Blandford Edwards, the daughter of an English officer, was
born in London in 1831 and died in 1892.  Though principally known to
fame as an Egyptologist of note, she began publishing novels in 1864,
among them being "Debenham's Vow," "Miss Carew, and Other Tales" and
"Lord Brackenbury."  "The Four-Fifteen Express" was published at the
height of her popularity as a writer of fiction.  Miss Edwards
lectured in the United States in 1889-90._



THE FOUR-FIFTEEN EXPRESS

By AMELIA B. EDWARDS

The events which I am about to relate took place between nine and ten
years ago.  Sebastopol had fallen in the early spring, the peace of
Paris had been concluded since March, our commercial relations with
the Russian Empire were but recently renewed; and I, returning home
after my first northward journey since the war, was well pleased with
the prospect of spending the month of December under the hospitable
and thoroughly English roof of my excellent friend, Jonathan Jelf,
Esq., of Dumbleton Manor, Clayborough, East Anglia.  Traveling in the
interests of the well-known firm in which it is my lot to be a junior
partner, I had been called upon to visit not only the capitals of
Russia and Poland, but had found it also necessary to pass some weeks
among the trading ports of the Baltic; whence it came that the year
was already far spent before I again set foot on English soil, and
that, instead of shooting pheasants with him, as I had hoped, in
October, I came to be my friend's guest during the more genial
Christmas-tide.

My voyage over, and a few days given up to business in Liverpool and
London, I hastened down to Clayborough with all the delight of a
schoolboy whose holidays are at hand.  My way lay by the Great East
Anglian line as far as Clayborough station, where I was to be met by
one of the Dumbleton carriages and conveyed across the remaining nine
miles of country.  It was a foggy afternoon, singularly warm for the
4th of December, and I had arranged to leave London by the 4:15
express.  The early darkness of winter had already closed in; the
lamps were lighted in the carriages; a clinging damp dimmed the
windows, adhered to the door-handles, and pervaded all the
atmosphere; while the gas-jets at the neighboring book-stand diffused
a luminous haze that only served to make the gloom of the terminus
more visible.  Having arrived some seven minutes before the starting
of the train, and, by the connivance of the guard, taken sole
possession of an empty compartment, I lighted my traveling-lamp, made
myself particularly snug, and settled down to the undisturbed
enjoyment of a book and a cigar.  Great, therefore, was my
disappointment when, at the last moment, a gentleman came hurrying
along the platform, glanced into my carriage, opened the locked door
with a private key, and stepped in.

It struck me at the first glance that I had seen him before--a tall,
spare man, thin-lipped, light-eyed, with an ungraceful stoop in the
shoulders, and scant gray hair worn somewhat long upon the collar.
He carried a light waterproof coat, an umbrella, and a large brown
japanned deed-box, which last he placed under the seat.  This done,
he felt carefully in his breast-pocket, as if to make certain of the
safety of his purse or pocketbook, laid his umbrella in the netting
overhead, spread the waterproof across his knees, and exchanged his
hat for a traveling-cap of some Scotch material.  By this time the
train was moving out of the station and into the faint gray of the
wintry twilight beyond.

I now recognized my companion.  I recognized him from the moment when
he removed his hat and uncovered the lofty, furrowed, and somewhat
narrow brow beneath.  I had met him, as I distinctly remembered, some
three years before, at the very house for which, in all probability,
he was now bound, like myself.  His name was Dwerrihouse; he was a
lawyer by profession, and, if I was not greatly mistaken, was first
cousin to the wife of my host.  I knew also that he was a man
eminently "well-to-do," both as regarded his professional and private
means.  The Jelfs entertained him with that sort of observant
courtesy which falls to the lot of the rich relation, the children
made much of him, and the old butler, albeit somewhat surly "to the
general," treated him with deference.  I thought, observing him by
the vague mixture of lamplight and twilight, that Mrs. Jelf's cousin
looked all the worse for the three years' wear and tear which had
gone over his head since our last meeting.  He was very pale, and had
a restless light in his eye that I did not remember to have observed
before.  The anxious lines, too, about his mouth were deepened, and
there was a cavernous, hollow look about his cheeks and temples which
seemed to speak of sickness or sorrow.  He had glanced at me as he
came in, but without any gleam of recognition in his face.  Now he
glanced again, as I fancied, somewhat doubtfully.  When he did so for
the third or fourth time I ventured to address him.

"Mr. John Dwerrihouse, I think?"

"That is my name," he replied.

"I had the pleasure of meeting you at Dumbleton about three years
ago."

Mr. Dwerrihouse bowed.

"I thought I knew your face," he said; "but your name, I regret to
say--"

"Langford--William Langford.  I have known Jonathan Jelf since we
were boys together at Merchant Taylor's, and I generally spend a few
weeks at Dumbleton in the shooting season.  I suppose we are bound
for the same destination?"

"Not if you are on your way to the manor," he replied.  "I am
traveling upon business--rather troublesome business too--while you,
doubtless, have only pleasure in view."

"Just so.  I am in the habit of looking forward to this visit as to
the brightest three weeks in all the year."

"It is a pleasant house," said Mr. Dwerrihouse.

"The pleasantest I know."

"And Jelf is thoroughly hospitable."

"The best and kindest fellow in the world!"

"They have invited me to spend Christmas week with them," pursued Mr.
Dwerrihouse, after a moment's pause.

"And you are coming?"

"I can not tell.  It must depend on the issue of this business which
I have in hand.  You have heard perhaps that we are about to
construct a branch line from Blackwater to Stockbridge."

I explained that I had been for some months away from England, and
had therefore heard nothing of the contemplated improvement.

Mr. Dwerrihouse smiled complacently.

"It will be an improvement," he said, "a great improvement.
Stockbridge is a flourishing town, and needs but a more direct
railway communication with the metropolis to become an important
centre of commerce.  This branch was my own idea.  I brought the
project before the board, and have myself superintended the execution
of it up to the present time."

"You are an East Anglian director, I presume?"

"My interest in the company," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse, "is threefold.
I am a director, I am a considerable shareholder, and, as head of the
firm of Dwerrihouse, Dwerrihouse & Craik, I am the company's
principal solicitor."

Loquacious, self-important, full of his pet project, and apparently
unable to talk on any other subject, Mr. Dwerrihouse then went on to
tell of the opposition he had encountered and the obstacles he had
overcome in the cause of the Stockbridge branch.  I was entertained
with a multitude of local details and local grievances.  The rapacity
of one squire, the impracticability of another, the indignation of
the rector whose glebe was threatened, the culpable indifference of
the Stockbridge townspeople, who could not be brought to see that
their most vital interests hinged upon a junction with the Great East
Anglian line; the spite of the local newspaper, and the unheard-of
difficulties attending the Common question, were each and all laid
before me with a circumstantiality that possessed the deepest
interest for my excellent fellow-traveler, but none whatever for
myself.  From these, to my despair, he went on to more intricate
matters: to the approximate expenses of construction per mile; to the
estimates sent in by different contractors; to the probable traffic
returns of the new line; to the provisional clauses of the new act as
enumerated in Schedule D of the company's last half-yearly report;
and so on and on and on, till my head ached and my attention flagged
and my eyes kept closing in spite of every effort that I made to keep
them open.  At length I was roused by these words:

"Seventy-five thousand pounds, cash down."

"Seventy-five thousand pounds, cash down," I repeated, in the
liveliest tone I could assume.  "That is a heavy sum."

"A heavy sum to carry here," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse, pointing
significantly to his breast-pocket, "but a mere fraction of what we
shall ultimately have to pay."

"You do not mean to say that you have seventy-five thousand pounds at
this moment upon your person?" I exclaimed.

"My good sir, have I not been telling you so for the last half-hour?"
said Mr. Dwerrihouse, testily.  "That money has to be paid over at
half-past eight o'clock this evening, at the office of Sir Thomas's
solicitors, on completion of the deed of sale."

"But how will you get across by night from Blackwater to Stockbridge
with seventy-five thousand pounds in your pock it?"

"To Stockbridge!" echoed the lawyer.  "I find I have made myself very
imperfectly understood.  I thought I had explained how this sum only
carries us as far as Mallingford--the first stage, as it were, of our
journey--and how our route from Blackwater to Mallingford lies
entirely through Sir Thomas Liddell's property."

"I beg your pardon," I stammered.  "I fear my thoughts were
wandering.  So you only go as far as Mallingford to-night?"

"Precisely.  I shall get a conveyance from the 'Blackwater Arms.'
And you?"

"Oh, Jelf sends a trap to meet me at Clayborough!  Can I be the
bearer of any message from you?"

"You may say, if you please, Mr. Langford, that I wished I could have
been your companion all the way, and that I will come over, if
possible, before Christmas."

"Nothing more?"

Mr. Dwerrihouse smiled grimly.  "Well," he said, "you may tell my
cousin that she need not burn the hall down in my honor this time,
and that I shall be obliged if she will order the blue-room chimney
to be swept before I arrive."

"That sounds tragic.  Had you a conflagration on the occasion of your
last visit to Dumbleton?"

"Something like it.  There had been no fire lighted in my bedroom
since the spring, the flue was foul, and the rooks had built in it;
so when I went up to dress for dinner I found the room full of smoke
and the chimney on fire.  Are we already at Blackwater?"

The train had gradually come to a pause while Mr. Dwerrihouse was
speaking, and, on putting my head out of the window, I could see the
station some few hundred yards ahead.  There was another train before
us blocking the way, and the guard was making use of the delay to
collect the Blackwater tickets.  I had scarcely ascertained our
position when the ruddy-faced official appeared at our carriage door.

"Tickets, sir!" said he.

"I am for Clayborough," I replied, holding out the tiny pink card.

He took it, glanced at it by the light of his little lantern, gave it
back, looked, as I fancied, somewhat sharply at my fellow-traveler,
and disappeared.

"He did not ask for yours," I said, with some surprise.

"They never do," replied Mr. Dwerrihouse; "they all know me, and of
course I travel free."

"Blackwater!  Blackwater!" cried the porter, running along the
platform beside us as we glided into the station.

Mr. Dwerrihouse pulled out his deed-box, put his traveling-cap in his
pocket, resumed his hat, took down his umbrella, and prepared to be
gone.

"Many thanks, Mr. Langford, for your society," he said, with
old-fashioned courtesy.  "I wish you a good-evening."

"Good-evening," I replied, putting out my hand.

But he either did not see it or did not choose to see it, and,
slightly lifting his hat, stepped out upon the platform.  Having done
this, he moved slowly away and mingled with the departing crowd.

Leaning forward to watch him out of sight, I trod upon something
which proved to be a cigar-case.  It had fallen, no doubt, from the
pocket of his waterproof coat, and was made of dark morocco leather,
with a silver monogram upon the side.  I sprang out of the carriage
just as the guard came up to lock me in.

"Is there one minute to spare?" I asked, eagerly.  "The gentleman who
traveled down with me from town has dropped his cigar-case; he is not
yet out of the station."

"Just a minute and a half, sir," replied the guard.  "You must be
quick."

I dashed along the platform as fast as my feet could carry me.  It
was a large station, and Mr. Dwerrihouse had by this time got more
than half-way to the farther end.

I, however, saw him distinctly, moving slowly with the stream.  Then,
as I drew nearer, I saw that he had met some friend, that they were
talking as they walked, that they presently fell back somewhat from
the crowd and stood aside in earnest conversation.  I made straight
for the spot where they were waiting.  There was a vivid gas-jet just
above their heads, and the light fell full upon their faces.  I saw
both distinctly--the face of Mr. Dwerrihouse and the face of his
companion.  Running, breathless, eager as I was, getting in the way
of porters and passengers, and fearful every instant lest I should
see the train going on without me, I yet observed that the new-comer
was considerably younger and shorter than the director, that he was
sandy-haired, mustachioed, small-featured, and dressed in a close-cut
suit of Scotch tweed.  I was now within a few yards of them.  I ran
against a stout gentleman, I was nearly knocked down by a
luggage-truck, I stumbled over a carpet-bag; I gained the spot just
as the driver's whistle warned me to return.

To my utter stupefaction, they were no longer there.  I had seen them
but two seconds before--and they were gone!  I stood still; I looked
to right and left; I saw no sign of them in any direction.  It was as
if the platform had gaped and swallowed them.

"There were two gentlemen standing here a moment ago," I said to a
porter at my elbow; "which way can they have gone?"

"I saw no gentlemen, sir," replied the man.

The whistle shrilled out again.  The guard, far up the platform, held
up his arm, and shouted to me to "come on!"

"If you're going on by this train, sir," said the porter, "you must
run for it."

I did run for it, just gained the carriage as the train began to
move, was shoved in by the guard, and left, breathless and
bewildered, with Mr. Dwerrihouse's cigar-case still in my hand.

It was the strangest disappearance in the world; it was like a
transformation trick in a pantomime.  They were there one
moment--palpably there, talking, with the gaslight full upon their
faces--and the next moment they were gone.  There was no door near,
no window, no staircase; it was a mere slip of barren platform,
tapestried with big advertisements.  Could anything be more
mysterious?

It was not worth thinking about, and yet, for my life, I could not
help pondering upon it--pondering, wondering, conjecturing, turning
it over and over in my mind, and beating my brains for a solution of
the enigma.  I thought of it all the way from Blackwater to
Clayborough.  I thought of it all the way from Clayborough to
Dumbleton, as I rattled along the smooth highway in a trim dog-cart,
drawn by a splendid black mare and driven by the silentest and
dapperest of East Anglian grooms.

We did the nine miles in something less than an hour, and pulled up
before the lodge gates just as the church clock was striking
half-past seven.  A couple of minutes more, and the warm glow of the
lighted hall was flooding out upon the gravel, a hearty grasp was on
my hand, and a clear jovial voice was bidding me "welcome to
Dumbleton."

"And now, my dear fellow," said my host, when the first greeting was
over, "you have no time to spare.  We dine at eight, and there are
people coming to meet you, so you must just get the dressing business
over as quickly as may be.  By the way, you will meet some
acquaintances; the Biddulphs are coming, and Prendergast (Prendergast
of the Skirmishers) is staying in the house.  Adieu!  Mrs. Jelf will
be expecting you in the drawing-room."

I was ushered to my room--not the blue room, of which Mr. Dwerrihouse
had made disagreeable experience, but a pretty little bachelor's
chamber, hung with a delicate chintz and made cheerful by a blazing
fire.  I unlocked my portmanteau.  I tried to be expeditious, but the
memory of my railway adventure haunted me.  I could not get free of
it; I could not shake it off.  It impeded me, it worried me, it
tripped me up, it caused me to mislay my studs, to mistie my cravat,
to wrench the buttons off my gloves.  Worst of all, it made me so
late that the party had all assembled before I reached the
drawing-room.  I had scarcely paid my respects to Mrs. Jelf when
dinner was announced, and we paired off, some eight or ten couples
strong, into the dining-room.

I am not going to describe either the guests or the dinner.  All
provincial parties bear the strictest family resemblance, and I am
not aware that an East Anglian banquet offers any exception to the
rule.  There was the usual country baronet and his wife; there were
the usual country parsons and their wives; there was the sempiternal
turkey and haunch of venison.  _Vanitas vanitatum_.  There is nothing
new under the sun.

I was placed about midway down the table.  I had taken one rector's
wife down to dinner, and I had another at my left hand.  They talked
across me, and their talk was about babies; it was dreadfully dull.
At length there came a pause.  The entr√©es had just been removed, and
the turkey had come upon the scene.  The conversation had all along
been of the languidest, but at this moment it happened to have
stagnated altogether.  Jelf was carving the turkey; Mrs. Jelf looked
as if she was trying to think of something to say; everybody else was
silent.  Moved by an unlucky impulse, I thought I would relate my
adventure.

"By the way, Jelf," I began, "I came down part of the way to-day with
a friend of yours."

"Indeed!" said the master of the feast, slicing scientifically into
the breast of the turkey.  "With whom, pray?"

"With one who bade me tell you that he should, if possible, pay you a
visit before Christmas."

"I can not think who that could be," said my friend, smiling.

"It must be Major Thorp," suggested Mrs. Jelf.  I shook my head.

"It was not Major Thorp," I replied; "it was a near relation of your
own, Mrs. Jelf."

"Then I am more puzzled than ever," replied my hostess.  "Pray tell
me who it was."

"It was no less a person than your cousin, Mr. John Dwerrihouse."

Jonathan Jelf laid down his knife and fork.  Mrs. Jelf looked at me
in a strange, startled way, and said never a word.

"And he desired me to tell you, my dear madam, that you need not take
the trouble to burn the hall down in his honor this time, but only to
have the chimney of the blue room swept before his arrival."

Before I had reached the end of my sentence I became aware of
something ominous in the faces of the guests.  I felt I had said
something which I had better have left unsaid, and that for some
unexplained reason my words had evoked a general consternation.  I
sat confounded, not daring to utter another syllable, and for at
least two whole minutes there was dead silence round the table.  Then
Captain Prendergast came to the rescue.

"You have been abroad for some months, have you not, Mr. Langford?"
he said, with the desperation of one who flings himself into the
breach.  "I heard you had been to Russia.  Surely you have something
to tell us of the state and temper of the country after the war?"

I was heartily grateful to the gallant Skirmisher for this diversion
in my favor.  I answered him, I fear, somewhat lamely; but he kept
the conversation up, and presently one or two others joined in, and
so the difficulty, whatever it might have been, was bridged
over--bridged over, but not repaired.  A something, an awkwardness, a
visible constraint remained.  The guests hitherto had been simply
dull, but now they were evidently uncomfortable and embarrassed.

The dessert had scarcely been placed upon the table when the ladies
left the room.  I seized the opportunity to select a vacant chair
next Captain Prendergast.

"In Heaven's name," I whispered, "what was the matter just now?  What
had I said?"

"You mentioned the name of John Dwerrihouse."

"What of that?  I had seen him not two hours before."

"It is a most astounding circumstance that you should have seen him,"
said Captain Prendergast.  "Are you sure it was he?"

"As sure as of my own identity.  We were talking all the way between
London and Blackwater.  But why does that surprise you?"

"Because," replied Captain Prendergast, dropping his voice to the
lowest whisper--"_because John Dwerrihouse absconded three months ago
with seventy-five thousand pounds of the company's money, and has
never been heard of since._"

John Dwerrihouse had absconded three months ago--and I had seen him
only a few hours back!  John Dwerrihouse had embezzled seventy-five
thousand pounds of the company's money, yet told me that he carried
that sum upon his person!  Were ever facts so strangely incongruous,
so difficult to reconcile?  How should he have ventured again into
the light of day?  How dared he show himself along the line?  Above
all, what had he been doing throughout those mysterious three months
of disappearance?

Perplexing questions these--questions which at once suggested
themselves to the minds of all concerned, but which admitted of no
easy solution.  I could find no reply to them.  Captain Prendergast
had not even a suggestion to offer.  Jonathan Jelf, who seized the
first opportunity of drawing me aside and learning all that I had to
tell, was more amazed and bewildered than either of us.  He came to
my room that night, when all the guests were gone, and we talked the
thing over from every point of view; without, it must be confessed,
arriving at any kind of conclusion.

"I do not ask you," he said, "whether you can have mistaken your man.
That is impossible."

"As impossible as that I should mistake some stranger for yourself."

"It is not a question of looks or voice, but of facts.  That he
should have alluded to the fire in the blue room is proof enough of
John Dwerrihouse's identity.  How did he look?"

"Older, I thought; considerably older, paler, and more anxious."

"He has had enough to make him look anxious, anyhow," said my friend,
gloomily, "be he innocent or guilty."

"I am inclined to believe that he is innocent," I replied.  "He
showed no embarrassment when I addressed him, and no uneasiness when
the guard came round.  His conversation was open to a fault.  I might
almost say that he talked too freely of the business which he had in
hand."

"That again is strange, for I know no one more reticent on such
subjects.  He actually told you that he had the seventy-five thousand
pounds in his pocket?"

"He did."

"Humph!  My wife has an idea about it, and she may be right--"

"What idea?"

"Well, she fancies--women are so clever, you know, at putting
themselves inside people's motives--she fancies that he was tempted,
that he did actually take the money, and that he has been concealing
himself these three months in some wild part of the country,
struggling possibly with his conscience all the time, and daring
neither to abscond with his booty nor to come back and restore it."

"But now that he has come back?"

"That is the point.  She conceives that he has probably thrown
himself upon the company's mercy, made restitution of the money, and,
being forgiven, is permitted to carry the business through as if
nothing whatever had happened."

"The last," I replied, "is an impossible case.  Mrs. Jelf thinks like
a generous and delicate-minded woman, but not in the least like a
board of railway directors.  They would never carry forgiveness so
far."

"I fear not; and yet it is the only conjecture that bears a semblance
of likelihood.  However, we can run over to Clayborough to-morrow and
see if anything is to be learned.  By the way, Prendergast tells me
you picked up his cigar-case."

"I did so, and here it is."

Jelf took the cigar-case, examined it by the light of the lamp, and
said at once that it was beyond doubt Mr. Dwerrihouse's property, and
that he remembered to have seen him use it.

"Here, too, is his monogram on the side," he added--"a big J
transfixing a capital D.  He used to carry the same on his
note-paper."

"It offers, at all events, a proof that I was not dreaming."

"Ay, but it is time you were asleep and dreaming now.  I am ashamed
to have kept you up so long.  Good-night."

"Good-night, and remember that I am more than ready to go with you to
Clayborough, or Blackwater, or London, or anywhere, if I can be of
the least service."

"Thanks!  I know you mean it, old friend, and it may be that I shall
put you to the test.  Once more, good-night."

So we parted for that night, and met again in the breakfast-room at
half-past eight next morning.  It was a hurried, silent,
uncomfortable meal; none of us had slept well, and all were thinking
of the same subject.  Mrs. Jelf had evidently been crying, Jelf was
impatient to be off, and both Captain Prendergast and myself felt
ourselves to be in the painful position of outsiders who are
involuntarily brought into a domestic trouble.  Within twenty minutes
after we had left the breakfast-table the dog-cart was brought round,
and my friend and I were on the road to Clayborough.

"Tell you what it is, Langford," he said, as we sped along between
the wintry hedges, "I do not much fancy to bring up Dwerrihouse's
name at Clayborough.  All the officials know that he is my wife's
relation, and the subject just now is hardly a pleasant one.  If you
don't much mind, we will take the 11:10 to Blackwater.  It's an
important station, and we shall stand a far better chance of picking
up information there than at Clayborough."

So we took the 11:10, which happened to be an express, and, arriving
at Blackwater about a quarter before twelve, proceeded at once to
prosecute our inquiry.

We began by asking for the station-master, a big, blunt,
business-like person, who at once averred that he knew Mr. John
Dwerrihouse perfectly well, and that there was no director on the
line whom he had seen and spoken to so frequently.

"He used to be down here two or three times a week about three months
ago," said he, "when the new line was first set afoot; but since
then, you know, gentlemen--"

He paused significantly.

Jelf flushed scarlet.

"Yes, yes," he said, hurriedly; "we know all about that.  The point
now to be ascertained is whether anything has been seen or heard of
him lately."

"Not to my knowledge," replied the station-master.

"He is not known to have been down the line any time yesterday, for
instance?"

The station-master shook his head.

"The East Anglian, sir," said he, "is about the last place where he
would dare to show himself.  Why, there isn't a station-master, there
isn't a guard, there isn't a porter, who doesn't know Mr. Dwerrihouse
by sight as well as he knows his own face in the looking-glass, or
who wouldn't telegraph for the police as soon as he had set eyes on
him at any point along the line.  Bless you, sir! there's been a
standing order out against him ever since the 25th of September last."

"And yet," pursued my friend, "a gentleman who traveled down
yesterday from London to Clayborough by the afternoon express
testifies that he saw Mr. Dwerrihouse in the train, and that Mr.
Dwerrihouse alighted at Blackwater station."

"Quite impossible, sir," replied the station-master, promptly.

"Why impossible?"

"Because there is no station along the line where he is so well known
or where he would run so great a risk.  It would be just running his
head into the lion's mouth; he would have been mad to come nigh
Blackwater station; and if he had come he would have been arrested
before he left the platform."

"Can you tell me who took the Blackwater tickets of that train?"

"I can, sir.  It was the guard, Benjamin Somers."

"And where can I find him?"

"You can find him, sir, by staying here, if you please, till one
o'clock.  He will be coming through with the up express from
Crampton, which stays at Blackwater for ten minutes."

We waited for the up express, beguiling the time as best we could by
strolling along the Blackwater road till we came almost to the
outskirts of the town, from which the station was distant nearly a
couple of miles.  By one o'clock we were back again upon the platform
and waiting for the train.  It came punctually, and I at once
recognized the ruddy-faced guard who had gone down with my train the
evening before.

"The gentlemen want to ask you something about Mr. Dwerrihouse,
Somers," said the station-master, by way of introduction.

The guard flashed a keen glance from my face to Jelf's and back again
to mine.

"Mr. John Dwerrihouse, the late director?" said he, interrogatively.

"The same," replied my friend.  "Should you know him if you saw him?"

"Anywhere, sir."

"Do you know if he was in the 4:15 express yesterday afternoon?"

"He was not, sir."

"How can you answer so positively?"

"Because I looked into every carriage and saw every face in that
train, and I could take my oath that Mr. Dwerrihouse was not in it.
This gentleman was," he added, turning sharply upon me.  "I don't
know that I ever saw him before in my life, but I remember his face
perfectly.  You nearly missed taking your seat in time at this
station, sir, and you got out at Clayborough."

"Quite true, guard," I replied; "but do you not also remember the
face of the gentleman who traveled down in the same carriage with me
as far as here?"

"It was my impression, sir, that you traveled down alone," said
Somers, with a look of some surprise.

"By no means.  I had a fellow-traveler as far as Blackwater, and it
was in trying to restore him the cigar-case which he had dropped in
the carriage that I so nearly let you go on without me."

"I remember your saying something about a cigar-case, certainly,"
replied the guard; "but--"

"You asked for my ticket just before we entered the station."

"I did, sir."

"Then you must have seen him.  He sat in the corner next the very
door to which you came."

"No, indeed; I saw no one."

I looked at Jelf.  I began to think the guard was in the
ex-director's confidence, and paid for his silence.

"If I had seen another traveler I should have asked for his ticket,"
added Somers.  "Did you see me ask for his ticket, sir?"

"I observed that you did not ask for it, but he explained that by
saying--" I hesitated.  I feared I might be telling too much, and so
broke off abruptly.

The guard and the station-master exchanged glances.  The former
looked impatiently at his watch.

"I am obliged to go on in four minutes more, sir," he said.

"One last question, then."  interposed Jelf, with a sort of
desperation.  "If this gentleman's fellow-traveler had been Mr. John
Dwerrihouse, and he had been sitting in the corner next the door by
which you took the tickets, could you have failed to see and
recognize him?"

"No, sir; it would have been quite impossible."

"And you are certain you did not see him?"

"As I said before, sir, I could take my oath I did not see him.  And
if it wasn't that I don't like to contradict a gentleman, I would say
I could also take my oath that this gentleman was quite alone in the
carriage the whole way from London to Clayborough.  Why, sir," he
added, dropping his voice so as to be inaudible to the
station-master, who had been called away to speak to some person
close by, "you expressly asked me to give you a compartment to
yourself, and I did so.  I locked you in, and you were so good as to
give me something for myself."

"Yes; but Mr. Dwerrihouse had a key of his own."

"I never saw him, sir; I saw no one in that compartment but yourself.
Beg pardon, sir; my time's up."

And with this the ruddy guard touched his cap and was gone.  In
another minute the heavy panting of the engine began afresh, and the
train glided slowly out of the station.

We looked at each other for some moments in silence.  I was the first
to speak.

"Mr. Benjamin Somers knows more than he chooses to tell," I said.

"Humph! do you think so?"

"It must be.  He could not have come to the door without seeing him;
it's impossible."

"There is one thing not impossible, my dear fellow."

"What is that?"

"That you may have fallen asleep and dreamed the whole thing."

"Could I dream of a branch line that I had never heard of?  Could I
dream of a hundred and one business details that had no kind of
interest for me?  Could I dream of the seventy-five thousand pounds?"

"Perhaps you might have seen or heard some vague account of the
affair while you were abroad.  It might have made no impression upon
you at the time, and might have come back to you in your dreams,
recalled perhaps by the mere names of the stations on the line."

"What about the fire in the chimney of the blue room--should I have
heard of that during my journey?"

"Well, no; I admit there is a difficulty about that point."

"And what about the cigar-case?"

"Ay, by Jove! there is the cigar-case.  That is a stubborn fact.
Well, it's a mysterious affair, and it will need a better detective
than myself, I fancy, to clear it up.  I suppose we may as well go
home."

A week had not gone by when I received a letter from the secretary of
the East Anglian Railway Company, requesting the favor of my
attendance at a special board meeting not then many days distant.  No
reasons were alleged and no apologies offered for this demand upon my
time, but they had heard, it was clear, of my inquiries anent the
missing director, and had a mind to put me through some sort of
official examination upon the subject.  Being still a guest at
Dumbleton Hall, I had to go up to London for the purpose, and
Jonathan Jelf accompanied me.  I found the direction of the Great
East Anglian line represented by a party of some twelve or fourteen
gentlemen seated in solemn conclave round a huge green baize table,
in a gloomy boardroom adjoining the London terminus.

Being courteously received by the chairman (who at once began by
saying that certain statements of mine respecting Mr. John
Dwerrihouse had come to the knowledge of the direction, and that they
in consequence desired to confer with me on those points), we were
placed at the table, and the inquiry proceeded in due form.

I was first asked if I knew Mr. John Dwerrihouse, how long I had been
acquainted with him, and whether I could identify him at sight.  I
was then asked when I had seen him last.  To which I replied: "On the
4th of this present month, December, 1856."  Then came the inquiry of
where I had seen him on that fourth day of December; to which I
replied that I met him in a first-class compartment of the 4:15 down
express, that he got in just as the train was leaving the London
terminus, and that he alighted at Blackwater station.  The chairman
then inquired whether I had held any communication with my
fellow-traveler; whereupon I related, as nearly as I could remember
it, the whole bulk and substance of Mr. John Dwerrihouse's diffuse
information respecting the new branch line.

To all this the board listened with profound attention, while the
chairman presided and the secretary took notes.  I then produced the
cigar-case.  It was passed from hand to hand, and recognized by all.
There was not a man present who did not remember that plain
cigar-case with its silver monogram, or to whom it seemed anything
less than entirely corroborative of my evidence.  When at length I
had told all that I had to tell, the chairman whispered something to
the secretary; the secretary touched a silver hand-bell, and the
guard, Benjamin Somers, was ushered into the room.  He was then
examined as carefully as myself.  He declared that he knew Mr. John
Dwerrihouse perfectly well, that he could not be mistaken in him,
that he remembered going down with the 4:15 express on the afternoon
in question, that he remembered me, and that, there being one or two
empty first-class compartments on that especial afternoon, he had, in
compliance with my request, placed me in a carriage by myself.  He
was positive that I remained alone in that compartment all the way
from London to Clayborough.  He was ready to take his oath that Mr.
Dwerrihouse was neither in that carriage with me, nor in any
compartment of that train.  He remembered distinctly to have examined
my ticket at Blackwater; was certain that there was no one else at
that time in the carriage; could not have failed to observe a second
person, if there had been one; had that second person been Mr. John
Dwerrihouse should have quietly double-locked the door of the
carriage and have at once given information to the Blackwater
station-master.  So clear, so decisive, so ready, was Somers with
this testimony, that the board looked fairly puzzled.

"You hear this person's statement, Mr. Langford," said the chairman.
"It contradicts yours in every particular.  What have you to say in
reply?"

"I can only repeat what I said before.  I am quite as positive of the
truth of my own assertions as Mr. Somers can be of the truth of his."

"You say that Mr. Dwerrihouse alighted at Blackwater, and that he was
in possession of a private key.  Are you sure that he had not
alighted by means of that key before the guard came round for the
tickets?"

"I am quite positive that he did not leave the carriage till the
train had fairly entered the station, and the other Blackwater
passengers alighted.  I even saw that he was met there by a friend."

"Indeed!  Did you see that person distinctly?"

"Quite distinctly."

"Can you describe his appearance?"

"I think so.  He was short and very slight, sandy-haired, with a
bushy mustache and beard, and he wore a closely fitting suit of gray
tweed, His age I should take to be about thirty-eight or forty."

"Did Mr. Dwerrihouse leave the station in this person's company?"

"I can not tell.  I saw them walking together down the platform, and
then I saw them standing aside under a gas-jet, talking earnestly.
After that I lost sight of them quite suddenly, and just then my
train went on, and I with it."

The chairman and secretary conferred together in an undertone.  The
directors whispered to one another.  One or two looked suspiciously
at the guard.  I could see that my evidence remained unshaken, and
that, like myself, they suspected some complicity between the guard
and the defaulter.

"How far did you conduct that 4:15 express on the day in question,
Somers?" asked the chairman.

"All through, sir," replied the guard, "from London to Crampton."

"How was it that you were not relieved at Clayborough?  I thought
there was always a change of guards at Clayborough."

"There used to be, sir, till the new regulations came in force last
midsummer, since when the guards in charge of express trains go the
whole way through."

The chairman turned to the secretary.

"I think it would be as well," he said, "if we had the day-book to
refer to upon this point."

Again the secretary touched the silver hand-bell, and desired the
porter in attendance to summon Mr. Raikes.  From a word or two
dropped by another of the directors I gathered that Mr. Raikes was
one of the under-secretaries.

He came, a small, slight, sandy-haired, keen-eyed man, with an eager,
nervous manner, and a forest of light beard and mustache.  He just
showed himself at the door of the board-room, and, being requested to
bring a certain day-book from a certain shelf in a certain room,
bowed and vanished.

He was there such a moment, and the surprise of seeing him was so
great and sudden, that it was not till the door had closed upon him
that I found voice to speak.  He was no sooner gone, however, than I
sprang to my feet.

"That person," I said, "is the same who met Mr. Dwerrihouse upon the
platform at Blackwater!"

There was a general movement of surprise.  The chairman looked grave
and somewhat agitated.

"Take care, Mr. Langford," he said; "take care what you say."

"I am as positive of his identity as of my own."

"Do you consider the consequences of your words?  Do you consider
that you are bringing a charge of the gravest character against one
of the company's servants?"

"I am willing to be put upon my oath, if necessary.  The man who came
to that door a minute since is the same whom I saw talking with Mr.
Dwerrihouse on the Blackwater platform.  Were he twenty times the
company's servant, I could say neither more nor less."

The chairman turned again to the guard.

"Did you see Mr. Raikes in the train or on the platform?" he asked.

Somers shook his head.

"I am confident Mr. Raikes was not in the train," he said, "and I
certainly did not see him on the platform."

The chairman turned next to the secretary.

"Mr. Raikes is in your office, Mr. Hunter," he said.  "Can you
remember if he was absent on the 4th instant?"

"I do not think he was," replied the secretary, "but I am not
prepared to speak positively.  I have been away most afternoons
myself lately, and Mr. Raikes might easily have absented himself if
he had been disposed."

At this moment the under-secretary returned with the day-book under
his arm.

"Be pleased to refer, Mr. Raikes," said the chairman, "to the entries
of the 4th instant, and see what Benjamin Somers's duties were on
that day."

Mr. Raikes threw open the cumbrous volume, and ran a practised eye
and finger down some three or four successive columns of entries.
Stopping suddenly at the foot of a page, he then read aloud that
Benjamin Somers had on that day conducted the 4:15 express from
London to Crampton.

The chairman leaned forward in his seat, looked the under-secretary
full in the face, and said, quite sharply and suddenly:

"And where were you, Mr. Raikes, on the same afternoon?"

"_I_, sir?"

"You, Mr. Raikes.  Where were you on the afternoon and evening of the
4th of the present month?"

"Here, sir, in Mr. Hunter's office.  Where else should I be?"

There was a dash of trepidation in the under-secretary's voice as he
said this, but his look of surprise was natural enough.

"We have some reason for believing, Mr. Raikes, that you were absent
that afternoon without leave.  Was this the case?"

"Certainly not, sir.  I have not had a day's holiday since September.
Mr. Hunter will bear me out in this."

Mr. Hunter repeated what he had previously said on the subject, but
added that the clerks in the adjoining office would be certain to
know.  Whereupon the senior clerk, a grave, middle-aged person in
green glasses, was summoned and interrogated.

His testimony cleared the under-secretary at once.  He declared that
Mr. Raikes had in no instance, to his knowledge, been absent during
office hours since his return from his annual holiday in September.

I was confounded.  The chairman turned to me with a smile, in which a
shade of covert annoyance was scarcely apparent.

"You hear, Mr. Langford?" he said.

"I hear, sir; but my conviction remains unshaken."

"I fear, Mr. Langford, that your convictions are very insufficiently
based," replied the chairman, with a doubtful cough.  "I fear that
you 'dream dreams,' and mistake them for actual occurrences.  It is a
dangerous habit of mind, and might lead to dangerous results.  Mr.
Raikes here would have found himself in an unpleasant position had he
not proved so satisfactory an alibi."

I was about to reply, but he gave me no time.

"I think, gentlemen," he went on to say, addressing the board, "that
we should be wasting time to push this inquiry further.  Mr.
Langford's evidence would seem to be of an equal value throughout.
The testimony of Benjamin Somers disproves his first statement, and
the testimony of the last witness disproves his second.  I think we
may conclude that Mr. Langford fell asleep in the train on the
occasion of his journey to Clayborough, and dreamed an unusually
vivid and circumstantial dream, of which, however, we have now heard
quite enough."

There are few things more annoying than to find one's positive
convictions met with incredulity.  I could not help feeling
impatience at the turn that affairs had taken.  I was not proof
against the civil sarcasm of the chairman's manner.  Most intolerable
of all, however, was the quiet smile lurking about the corners of
Benjamin Somers's mouth, and the half-triumphant, half-malicious
gleam in the eyes of the under-secretary.  The man was evidently
puzzled and somewhat alarmed.  His looks seemed furtively to
interrogate me.  Who was I?  What did I want?  Why had I come there
to do him an ill turn with his employers?  What was it to me whether
or no he was absent without leave?

Seeing all this, and perhaps more irritated by it than the thing
deserved, I begged leave to detain the attention of the board for a
moment longer.  Jelf plucked me impatiently by the sleeve.

"Better let the thing drop," he whispered.  "The chairman's right
enough; you dreamed it, and the less said now the better."

I was not to be silenced, however, in this fashion.  I had yet
something to say, and I would say it.  It was to this effect: that
dreams were not usually productive of tangible results, and that I
requested to know in what way the chairman conceived I had evolved
from my dream so substantial and well-made a delusion as the
cigar-case which I had had the honor to place before him at the
commencement of our interview.

"The cigar-case, I admit, Mr. Langford," the chairman replied, "is a
very strong point in your evidence.  It is your only strong point,
however, and there is just a possibility that we may all be misled by
a mere accidental resemblance.  Will you permit me to see the case
again?"

"It is unlikely," I said, as I handed it to him, "that any other
should bear precisely this monogram, and yet be in all other
particulars exactly similar."

The chairman examined it for a moment in silence, and then passed it
to Mr. Hunter.  Mr. Hunter turned it over and over, and shook his
head.

"This is no mere resemblance," he said.  "It is John Dwerrihouse's
cigar-case to a certainty.  I remember it perfectly; I have seen it a
hundred times."

"I believe I may say the same," added the chairman; "yet how account
for the way in which Mr. Langford asserts that it came into his
possession?"

"I can only repeat," I replied, "that I found it on the floor of the
carriage after Mr. Dwerrihouse had alighted.  It was in leaning out
to look after him that I trod upon it, and it was in running after
him for the purpose of restoring it that I saw, or believed I saw,
Mr. Raikes standing aside with him in earnest conversation."

Again I felt Jonathan Jelf plucking at my sleeve.

"Look at Raikes," he whispered; "look at Raikes!"

I turned to where the under-secretary had been standing a moment
before, and saw him, white as death, with lips trembling and livid,
stealing toward the door.

To conceive a sudden, strange, and indefinite suspicion, to fling
myself in his way, to take him by the shoulders as if he were a
child, and turn his craven face, perforce, toward the board, were
with me the work of an instant.

"Look at him!" I exclaimed.  "Look at his face!  I ask no better
witness to the truth of my words."

The chairman's brow darkened.

"Mr. Raikes," he said, sternly, "if you know anything you had better
speak."

Vainly trying to wrench himself from my grasp, the under-secretary
stammered out an incoherent denial.

"Let me go," he said.  "I know nothing--you have no right to detain
me--let me go!"

"Did you, or did you not, meet Mr. John Dwerrihouse at Blackwater
station?  The charge brought against you is either true or false.  If
true, you will do well to throw yourself upon the mercy of the board
and make full confession of all that you know."

The under-secretary wrung his hands in an agony of helpless terror.

"I was away!" he cried.  "I was two hundred miles away at the time!
I know nothing about it--I have nothing to confess--I am innocent--I
call God to witness I am innocent!"

"Two hundred miles away!" echoed the chairman.  "What do you mean?"

"I was in Devonshire.  I had three weeks' leave of absence--I appeal
to Mr. Hunter--Mr. Hunter knows I had three weeks' leave of absence!
I was in Devonshire all the time; I can prove I was in Devonshire!"

Seeing him so abject, so incoherent, so wild with apprehension, the
directors began to whisper gravely among themselves, while one got
quietly up and called the porter to guard the door.

"What has your being in Devonshire to do with the matter?" said the
chairman.  "When were you in Devonshire?"

"Mr. Raikes took his leave in September," said the secretary, "about
the time when Mr. Dwerrihouse disappeared."

"I never even heard that he had disappeared till I came back!"

"That must remain to be proved," said the chairman.  "I shall at once
put this matter in the hands of the police.  In the meanwhile, Mr.
Raikes, being myself a magistrate and used to deal with these cases,
I advise you to offer no resistance, but to confess while confession
may yet do you service.  As for your accomplice--"

The frightened wretch fell upon his knees.

"I had no accomplice!" he cried.  "Only have mercy upon me--only
spare my life, and I will confess all!  I didn't mean to harm him!  I
didn't mean to hurt a hair of his head!  Only have mercy upon me, and
let me go!"

The chairman rose in his place, pale and agitated.  "Good heavens!"
he exclaimed, "what horrible mystery is this?  What does it mean?"

"As sure as there is a God in heaven," said Jonathan Jelf, "it means
that murder has been done."

"No! no! no!" shrieked Raikes, still upon his knees, and cowering
like a beaten hound.  "Not murder!  No jury that ever sat could bring
it in murder.  I thought I had only stunned him--I never meant to do
more than stun him!  Manslaughter--manslaughter--not murder!"

Overcome by the horror of this unexpected revelation, the chairman
covered his face with his hand and for a moment or two remained
silent.

"Miserable man," he said at length, "you have betrayed yourself."

"You bade me confess!  You urged me to throw myself upon the mercy of
the board!"

"You have confessed to a crime which no one suspected you of having
committed," replied the chairman, "and which this board has no power
either to punish or forgive.  All that I can do for you is to advise
you to submit to the law, to plead guilty, and to conceal nothing.
When did you do this deed?"

The guilty man rose to his feet, and leaned heavily against the
table.  His answer came reluctantly, like the speech of one dreaming.

"On the 22d of September."

On the 22d of September!  I looked in Jonathan Jelf's face, and he in
mine.  I felt my own paling with a strange sense of wonder and dread.
I saw his blanch suddenly, even to the lips.

"Merciful heaven!" he whispered.  "_What was it, then, that you saw
in the train?_"


What was it that I saw in the train?  That question remains
unanswered to this day.  I have never been able to reply to it.  I
only know that it bore the living likeness of the murdered man, whose
body had then been lying some ten weeks under a rough pile of
branches and brambles and rotting leaves, at the bottom of a deserted
chalk-pit about half-way between Blackwater and Mallingford.  I know
that it spoke and moved and looked as that man spoke and moved and
looked in life; that I heard, or seemed to hear, things related which
I could never otherwise have learned; that I was guided, as it were,
by that vision on the platform to the identification of the murderer;
and that, a passive instrument myself, I was destined, by means of
these mysterious teachings, to bring about the ends of justice.  For
these things I have never been able to account.

As for that matter of the cigar-case, it proved, on inquiry, that the
carriage in which I traveled down that afternoon to Clayborough had
not been in use for several weeks, and was, in point of fact, the
same in which poor John Dwerrihouse had performed his last journey.
The case had doubtless been dropped by him, and had lain unnoticed
till I found it.

Upon the details of the murder I have no need to dwell.  Those who
desire more ample particulars may find them, and the written
confession of Augustus Raikes, in the files of the "Times" for 1856.
Enough that the under-secretary, knowing the history of the new line,
and following the negotiation step by step through all its stages,
determined to waylay Mr. Dwerrihouse, rob him of the seventy-five
thousand pounds, and escape to America with his booty.

In order to effect these ends he obtained leave of absence a few days
before the time appointed for the payment of the money, secured his
passage across the Atlantic in a steamer advertised to start on the
23d, provided himself with a heavily loaded "life-preserver," and
went down to Blackwater to await the arrival of his victim.  How he
met him on the platform with a pretended message from the board, how
he offered to conduct him by a short cut across the fields to
Mallingford, how, having brought him to a lonely place, he struck him
down with the life-preserver, and so killed him, and how, finding
what he had done, he dragged the body to the verge of an
out-of-the-way chalk-pit, and there flung it in and piled it over
with branches and brambles, are facts still fresh in the memories of
those who, like the connoisseurs in De Quincey's famous essay, regard
murder as a fine art.  Strangely enough, the murderer, having done
his work, was afraid to leave the country.  He declared that he had
not intended to take the director's life, but only to stun and rob
him; and that, finding the blow had killed, he dared not fly for fear
of drawing down suspicion upon his own head.  As a mere robber he
would have been safe in the States, but as a murderer he would
inevitably have been pursued and given up to justice.  So he
forfeited his passage, returned to the office as usual at the end of
his leave, and locked up his ill-gotten thousands till a more
convenient opportunity.  In the meanwhile he had the satisfaction of
finding that Mr. Dwerrihouse was universally believed to have
absconded with the money, no one knew how or whither.

Whether he meant murder or not, however, Mr. Augustus Raikes paid the
full penalty of his crime, and was hanged at the Old Bailey in the
second week in January, 1857.  Those who desire to make his further
acquaintance may see him any day (admirably done in wax) in the
Chamber of Horrors at Madame Tussaud's exhibition, in Baker Street.
He is there to be found in the midst of a select society of ladies
and gentlemen of atrocious memory, dressed in the close-cut tweed
suit which he wore on the evening of the murder, and holding in his
hand the identical life-preserver with which he committed it.




OUR LAST WALK

BY HUGH CONWAY

_Frederick John Fargus (born 1847, died 7885), writing under the
pen-name of Hugh Conway, lived to enjoy but one year of literary fame
as the author of "Called Back," a melodramatic novelette of
strikingly clever conception and powerful narrative style.  The
qualities which distinguish this book are to be found in his other
stories, a number of which, including the present selection, were
published in the year preceding and that following his untimely
death._



OUR LAST WALK

By HUGH CONWAY

If I wished to tell a love tale, I should begin this with the
sweetest memories of my life, and relate when and where Walter Linton
and I first met; should describe my pride and happiness when I knew
that he wished me to become his wife.  The love we bore each other
through life--ay, even after life--may be made manifest as I write
these lines, but it is not because I loved him I have this tale to
tell.  Other women have loved as I love, and have mourned as I mourn:
my life, so far as the joy and grief of it go, is but the life of
thousands.

Had Walter Linton, when first he asked me for the heart which was
already his own, been but a poor, struggling man, I should have given
him all as freely as I did then.  If need had been, I could have
waited patiently for years, or until fortune smiled upon him.
Feeling this, I had no false sentiment as to sharing the worldly good
that was his, although I was a penniless girl and brought nothing in
my hands.  Of course, kind friends around wondered why Walter did not
choose a wife who would bring him wealth as well as love.  Ah, no one
could have given him more love than I could give him; that was all he
wanted or asked for.  He was twenty-three, and his own master; I was
twenty, and utterly alone in this world.  So we were married--just
six weeks after that happy spring day on which he told me I was
dearest to him.

Our home--a dear gray old house, full of pleasant corners--was
Draycot Hall, Somersetshire, not far from the Mendip Hills.  Walter
had recently inherited the house and the estates of Draycot, and when
we took possession of our kingdom, which was almost as new to Walter
as it was to me, life seemed to hold all that could be desired.
Walter's income was sufficient for the life of a quiet country
gentleman--a life to which he settled down, and appeared to find
every wish gratified in that happy existence.  Shooting, fishing, and
hunting gave him plenty of amusement, and the land, part of which he
farmed himself, brought occupation and interest enough to make him
feel that his life was not altogether an idle or useless one.

Then, to make our happiness complete, the children came--a girl, then
one, two, three bonny boys.  How merry and busy the old house grew
with them, the sturdy rogues!  How proud Walter was of them!

We were not very rich people.  Compared to that of some of our county
neighbors, our income was insignificant.  Draycot Hall, although not
such an imposing pile as the name might suggest, was by no means a
small house; and, like all rambling old places, cost a good deal of
money to keep up.  Even when we began life together we found, at the
end of the year, that our expenditure and income nearly tallied, and
as expenses increased with an increasing family, we felt that a few
hundreds added to our revenue would be a very welcome addition.  But
in spite of this our lot was too happy for us to think of grumbling.

We sat one summer's evening on the lawn.  The air was cooled by late
fallen rain, and sweet with fragrance rising from the freshened
flowers--for days were long and petals not yet closed.  Our latest
given child slept on my knee; and, as we watched the sun sink slowly
down behind the Mendip Hills, my husband said:

"Helena, how shall we manage to start all these boys in life?"

I laughed at such a distant obligation.  We were still young, and it
seemed that so many years must pass before the baby on my knee would
want a starting hand.  I kissed the child's little white fingers.

"Why, Walter," I said, "you are looking a long, long way into the
future."

"Yes, my girl; but days happy as ours pass very quickly.  It will not
seem so long before we shall be obliged to think about it.  What
shall we do then?  We save no money even now, you know.  By-and-by we
must send these babies to school; after that they will want money to
help them on in professions.  How are we to do all this?  Our income
won't increase."

"We must try and economize," I answered, impressed by the really
serious view he took.

"But how?  As it is, we can scarcely make both ends meet.  I am
afraid I am selfish in living as I do.  I have serious thought of
going into some business and trying to make a fortune."

I begged, beseeched him to dismiss the wild idea.  Were we not happy
enough with all we now possessed?  Why change our mode of life, which
was so peaceful and sweet?  Besides, in my heart of hearts I doubted
if my good, easy-going Walter was quite fitted for a commercial
career.  He kissed me as I pleaded eloquently for a continuation of
our present happiness, and for a time the subject dropped.

Yet I could see, from remarks he now and again made, that the thought
lingered in his mind, and I began to fear lest, some day, he might
put it into practical shape, when the anxieties attendant on
money-making or money-losing might be ours.

It was some months after our conversation that old Reuben Dyke, a
well-known character in the village of Draycot, came to the Hall.  He
wanted to see the master on important business, he said.  This old
Reuben was the greatest gossip of the place--the ale-house
oracle--meddler in every one's business, and unsolicited
adviser-in-general to the little world around him.  He was a great
authority among the villagers, many of whom would have backed his
opinion against the united wisdom of a Daniel and a Solomon.  His
talk and broad Somerset accent always amused us, and, it may be,
insured him a better reception than his virtues merited.

To-day he entered the room with an indescribable look of mystery and
secrecy on his shrewd old face.  He carefully closed the door after
him and bade us a respectful good-day.  Then, drawing quite close to
us, he spoke in guarded whispers.

"I be jest come, zur, to tell 'ee as ther' have a-bin a chap a
staayin' at the Blue Boar vor the last two or dree daays.  Mebby,
zur, as you've a zeed un about--a darkish, picket-noased zort of a
chap."

"Yes, I saw him," answered Walter.  "What about him?"

"Now, look here, zur.  None o' we couldn't at vust miake out what a
wer' up to.  He yent one o' them outrides, you zee.  He werdn't
lookin' aater shopkippers.  He were a ferretin' about aater land.  Zo
we up and ax'd un what a farm a wer' aater, or if a did want to buy
any land hereabouts?  He laughed and zed, zes he, 'We be gwain to
make a raailroad right up droo theese yer valley.'  Zes I, 'I hoap my
head won't yache till we do get a raailwaay on Mendip, vor that is a
devilish poor country.'  'True,' zes he; 'but there be a lot o' coal
jest under--along Havyat Green and Upper Langford.'  Zes I, 'Zo I've
a-heerd;' and then I zeed in a minute which waay the cat wer'
jumpin'.  He werdn't gwain to make nar a raailwaay; he wanted to zenk
a coal-pit, and get howld o' zome land under false pretenses.  Zo, if
I wer' you, zur, and if I wer' Mr. Llewellyn, I should jest keep my
eyes open; vor I shouldn't wonder if, one o' thease here daays, he
won't be along and offer 'ee a hundred and fifty a yacre vor some o'
your poorest land.  But my advice to you, zur, is--doan't 'ee zell
it--not vor double the money."

After this important communication, Reuben bowed himself out;
retiring probably to the kitchen, in order that he might regale
himself with meat and drink and our servants with the latest village
gossip.  Walter and I sat digesting his news.

"I wonder if there can be any truth in it," said Walter.  "I'll go
down to-morrow and see that fellow at the inn, and ask him pointblank
about it."

But on the morrow the fellow at the inn was there no longer.  He had
departed and left no address.  The landlord only knew him as plain
Mr. Smith.  We never saw or heard of him again--whatever his errand
may have been, it was not revealed to us; but, nevertheless, old
Reuben's conjecture as to the object of his sojourn at the Blue Boar
quite unsettled Walter's mind.  The thought that untold wealth might
be lying under our very feet was always present to it, and at last he
resolved to employ experts who were competent to give an opinion on
the matter, and settle our hopes and doubts.

So, very soon, we were visited by Captain Thomas Davies, of
Aberfellteg, and Captain Davies Thomas, of Cwmtygwyn, two gentlemen
whose strangely accented English, redundant with such words as
"Inteet" and "Inteet to coodness," was a source of great amusement
and enjoyment to each of us.  They inspected, diagnosed,
experimented, and then reported.  My poor dear love! shall I ever
forget your excitement, your joy, as we perused together that glowing
joint production?  What wealth you dreamed of and counted up!  Not, I
know, that you wished for riches for your own sake--it was for the
sake of wife and children that the desire of acquiring a large
fortune obtained such a hold on you.  Ah me! how certain, how clear
and straightforward it all seemed!  Had not the mining captains
calculated, with an accuracy that seemed infallible, every ton of
coal that lay hidden beneath our green fields?  Did not their figures
prove beyond dispute the profit each ton raised must bring?  After
every contingency had been guarded against, what read like Aladdin's
wealth lay waiting for us to stoop down, take, and enjoy.  Why should
we not do so?

Then other gentlemen came to our quiet home--legal
gentlemen--gentlemen who were called financiers--gentlemen learned,
very learned, it seemed to me, in acreages, crops, and soils.  Old
safes were unlocked, old plans and musty deeds extracted from their
recesses.  I heard the word "Mortgage" frequently; and Walter told me
he had resolved to share his promised wealth with no one.  He would
work the projected mines solely on his own account; but, in order to
begin operations, money was needful; so he had arranged with the two
financial gentlemen, Messrs. Leach and Vincent, of Bristol, that such
sums of money as were necessary should be advanced to him upon the
security of his estate.  And these gentlemen applauded Walter's
courageous resolution, and everything went so pleasantly.

Then the digging began!

Oh, how I hated it!  From the very first I hated it!  Not only did it
spoil one of our prettiest fields--the one where the children
gathered earliest cowslips--but it brought strange faces and rough
forms to the quiet, sleepy little village.  Men and women of a very
different type to that of laborers round about.  Slatternly untidy
women and strong, surly men who knew not the traditions of the land.
Men who were supposed to beat their wives once a week, and who, we
knew, played havoc with our neighbors' costly preserves.  Men who
worked hard--very hard--and insisted upon that work being highly paid
for--who spent so large a proportion of those hard-earned wages in
drink, that the landlords of the opposition village inns actually
shook hands in their unexpected prosperity; whilst our kind, old,
easy-going rector fairly cried at the way in which his new and
unwelcome parishioners were demoralizing the old ones, and old Reuben
Dyke seemed to look almost patronizingly upon us, as two deserving
young people helped to fortune by his great sagacity and wisdom.

So it went on, month after month; yet I saw no signs of the advent of
that promised wealth.  So far as I could understand it, the seam of
coal hit upon by those clever captains was a failure.  It broke, or
dipped, or something else; so the continuation had to be sought
elsewhere.  Thereupon Captains Thomas Davies and Davies Thomas came
over again, inspected again, and reported so cheerfully that Walter's
face lost that look of anxiety which I had lately seen upon it, and
he pushed on the work more briskly than before.

Then they told me the right seam had been found--Walter was radiant.
Out of the first money gained he would send Thomas Davies and Davies
Thomas a hundred pounds apiece, as an extra recognition due to their
skill and good counsel.  Larger sums than before were furnished by
our financial friends, who came to the Hall once or twice, and were,
I thought, very rude and familiar in their manner.  Machinery and
engines were erected, more men engaged, and in time great black heaps
began to accumulate, and grimy black faces met me at every turn.  Our
peaceful and beautiful home was so changed that I began almost to
loathe what had once been the dearest spot on earth to me, and to
long for change of air and scene.

Money seemed always being paid away--large sums that frightened me.
But was I not only a woman, who knew nothing of business?

Yet all these grievances were nothing to the grief I felt at seeing
the change in my darling's face.  Every week I noticed an alteration.
Gradually a cloud of care seemed settling down on his once gay
nature, and I knew his mind was anxious and ill at ease.  He grew
thinner; his dark hair showed signs of premature grayness; his sleep
was often restless and unfreshing.  Though now, as he ever had been,
kind and gentle to me, at times with others he was moody, silent, and
evidently worried.  All the brightness of youth appeared to be
leaving him, so much so that my heart ached to see him, and I felt I
could bear it no longer.  I would learn the worst he had to tell me,
claiming my right as a true wife to share trouble as well as joy with
my husband.

The confidence I was resolved to claim came unasked for.  One evening
Walter returned home and threw himself into a chair, apparently
utterly broken down.  He covered his eyes with his hands and sobbed
bitterly.

I knelt at his side and my arms were round him.  Then he told me
all--I need not give the details.  The bare truth was this: After all
the money spent, the coal raised was of such a poor quality that
every ton sold was sold at a loss.  And more money than I had ever
imagined had been expended.  Of course he had been cheated--I knew he
was being cheated the moment I saw the faces of the men who had lent
him the money he wanted; but there was no help for it now.  Messrs.
Leach and Vincent claimed, for advances, costs and interest, the
enormous sum of close upon ten thousand pounds.  Walter had just come
from Bristol, where these men carried on business, and after a stormy
interview with them, had been informed that unless the amount was
paid by Saturday, house, lands, and everything would be at once
advertised for sale--and to-day was Wednesday!

I knew nothing of law; but, even to my ignorance, this sudden demand
and swift procedure seemed unusual.

"But can they do it?" I asked.

"Yes, I am afraid they can.  Months ago, when they made me a large
advance, they gave me notice to pay the mortgage off.  It was a mere
matter of form, they said; but now they will act upon it.  They are
thorough-going rogues, and I believe have some scheme in their heads
by which they fancy it possible to get absolute possession of the
whole estate."

"But, Walter dear, the estate must be worth thousands more than that
amount."

"Oh yes, I can get the money easily enough.  But not in three days.
It will cut me to the heart even to see it all advertised, although
doubtless the sale may be stopped."

"Why not go to that nice old gentleman, Mr. Mainwaring?" I suggested.
"You always call him your family solicitor.  He will help you, I am
sure."

"That is just what I intend doing.  I shall go to London to-morrow,
and show him exactly how I stand, and beg as a great favor that I may
have the money at once.  When I return I will give orders for all the
men to be discharged and the machinery sold.  There shall be an end
of it before it makes an end of me."

I was almost hysterical with joy as I heard his last words.

"Oh, my love!" I cried.  "It will all come right with us yet.  We are
after all only half ruined.  We can let the Hall and go abroad for
several years.  Don't trouble about it any more.  If you could only
know how happy I am to think I shall have you back once again, all to
myself as of old, you would be happy too.  We will live in some quiet
French or Swiss town, and be everything to one another again."

So I talked to him and comforted him, until he grew more composed,
and, kissing me, owned that life was still worth having, even if
shorn of half its wealth.

That night I slept more happily than I had slept for months.

The morning's post brought a letter from Leach and Vincent.  It was
couched in legal terms, and stated that unless the amount due was
paid in notes or gold by Saturday at noon, they would take the
threatened steps.  Walter at once despatched a telegram, saying the
money would be paid, and requesting that the necessary release might
be prepared in order to avoid any delay.  Then he started for London,
in quest of ten thousand pounds.

I had little fear as to the result of his expedition.  I can read
faces; and long ago I had read in Mr. Mainwaring's face the kindness
of his disposition.  I knew he was rich, and that his clients were
also rich men; moreover, he had a high opinion of Walter, and held
him in what might almost be termed affection.  When he congratulated
me upon my marriage, he told me, in unmistakable words, what he
thought of my husband.  So I was not surprised when, on the Friday
evening, Walter returned with a semblance of the old joyous smile on
his face; and, after locking a pocketful of bank-notes in the safe,
sat down by me, and for the rest of the evening built airy castles,
or rather cottages, full of peacefulness and love.

When I awoke next morn, my heart was light; trouble, it seemed, had
been, but passed away so swiftly that its traces scarce remained.  I
threw the window open, and the fresh, sweet air of spring brought
gladness on its wings.  The honeysuckle, old and great, that clothed
the wall beneath my window, just gave signs of breaking into blossom;
leaning out, I plucked some sprays and pinned them in my dress.  A
thrush sung from a bush below; my heart kept echoing his notes of
love and joy.  What cared I for the money, or its loss?  Should I not
have my own love back again, and watch his face regain its old bright
look of health and happiness?  Passed by his side, and with our
children round, would not my life be pleasant in some quaint old town
of France?  And we would live so carefully, and save money as years
went on, until some day might bring us to the dear old Hall again.
Unhappy?--no! few moments in my life had happier been than these.

And Walter was cheerful.  He would soon be out of the clutches of his
obliging friends.  The shock was over.  He had told me what had been
gnawing at his heart for so long; he was now looking his troubles
fairly in the face, and, as usually happens, found them not so
terrible in aspect as he had imagined.  He buttoned his bank-notes in
his breast-pocket and started for the railway station.  He felt
better and stronger to-day, and, as the morning was so beautifully
fine, was tempted to walk the five miles, instead of driving, as he
usually did.

We were early risers, so he had plenty of time, and I thought the
walk would do him good.  Perhaps it was the feeling of newly restored
confidence--perfect and true--which now existed between us that made
his farewell to me that morning even more affectionate than it was
wont to be--made him insist upon having all the children brought
down, and taking many a kiss from those little rosy pursed-up
lips--made him pause when he reached the furthest point to which my
eyes could follow him, and turning, waft me one more farewell.

I should have walked with him, at any rate, part of the way; but
household duties had to be attended to; so, after watching his tall
figure disappear at the turning of the drive, I reentered the house,
hoping that the day would pass quickly, and hasten the evening which
would bring him back again.

Months and months ago I had promised a friend, who sighed in far-away
lands for English fields again, to make, this spring, a little
collection of dried ferns and send it to her.  The anxiety of the
last few months had driven the promise from my mind, but as, this
morning, I pictured our own projected emigration, my thoughts turned
to my distant friend, and my broken promise came back to me.  I
determined that on the first opportunity I would make amends for my
neglect.

Ferns, many of them scarce ones, grew plentifully in our pleasant
country; but on the road that Walter must take on his way to the
station they flourished in unusual abundance.  I could obtain many
varieties close at hand, but some few grew further off; so I asked
Walter, if he should chance to meet with any specimens of these
particular sorts, to pick a frond or two, which he could place
between the leaves of the book he carried.  I wanted, especially, a
specimen of the Northern Shield Fern, which even here is not very
common, growing as it does in little patches, sometimes miles apart.
He laughed at my idle request, but promised to attend to it.

The day wore on, and the sun got low.  It was time to send the
dog-cart to meet the train.  Long, long before the time had elapsed
in which, by any chance, it could return, I was waiting at the window
to welcome Walter home again.  I waited and waited, until so many
weary minutes crawled away that I was fain to conclude he had been
detained in Bristol until the next and last train.

I nursed my disappointment, and killed the time as best I could.  The
hour when I might surely expect him came and passed.  The train must
be late.  I opened the window, and waited and listened for the sound
of his coming.

At last I heard the ring of the horse's hoofs, and saw the
approaching dog-cart dimly by the light of the stars.  I ran to the
door, eager to greet my husband; but as the horse drew up on the
gravel, I could see only one figure in the dog-cart--that of James,
our groom.  He told me that his master had come by neither train, so,
after waiting, he had driven back alone.

I turned away, very miserable and sad at heart, but, strange to say,
felt no fear of evil.  Business had, of course, detained him.  It
seemed unkind not to have let me know in some way, but perhaps he
could find no means of doing so.  There was not the slightest chance
of his returning to-night, the distance being far too great for
driving.  I must wait until to-morrow.

It was only when I went to bed--alone, for almost the first time
since we were married--that fear fell upon me, and fancy brought
horrid ideas to my mind--that the possibility of evil having befallen
my husband came to me.  The large sum of money he carried, the lonely
road, the black-faced colliers about the neighborhood--all combined
to fill me with a nameless dread--a terror which I could scarcely put
into thoughts, much less into words.  Yet I strove with my fears,
trying to strangle each one as it was born.

"I shall see him to-morrow.  To-morrow I shall see him," I repeated
over and over again; and as that morning at last dawned, I fell into
a restless sleep.

But morning brought him not; noon brought him not--neither letter nor
message.  So my heart died within me; and taking a maid with me, I
started for Bristol by the afternoon train.  It was Sunday; the
streets of the large town looked dreary and deserted as we passed
through them.  Knowing Mr. Leach's private address, we drove straight
to his house.  After some delay I was shown into a room.

By and by Mr. Leach entered, with his fat forefinger closed in a book
of sermons, which, I felt instinctively, he had been engaged in
reading for the benefit of his young vultures.  His smooth face was
full of gentle astonishment that any one should wish to confer with
him on business matters on that particular evening in the week.  As I
looked at him and read through his mask of hypocrisy, I knew that the
man was a rogue and capable of committing any crime.  When he saw who
his visitor was, his astonished look changed to one of annoyance.  He
closed his book entirely, laying it on the table with the edifying
title turned toward me.

It seems childish to mention such trivial incidents; but during that
terrible time every word, every detail, seems graven upon my memory
in deep lines that will never be effaced.

"I have called, Mr. Leach--" I began.

"My dear Mrs. Linton, I know why you have called.  But I am sorry to
be obliged to say that your errand is useless--utterly useless.  Mr.
Linton made a promise he has not kept.  He can not blame us for the
steps we have taken."

"A promise not kept?" I echoed.

"Certainly not.  He undertook to pay us a large sum of money
yesterday.  He has not been near us--I conclude he fa ill," he added,
with an approach to a sneer.

I sunk back in the wildest grief.  Then all my fears of the night,
all my forebodings of the day, were true!  I knew that never--never
again should I look on Walter's face.  He had been murdered--but by
whom?

Mr. Leach endeavored, after the manner of his kind, to comfort me.
He placed his fat hand in a soothing way upon my arm.  This action
restored my senses to me.

"My husband left me only yesterday morning with the money you claim
in his pocket.  I know it for certain.  He was going straight to you.
Where is he?  Tell me?"

Mr. Leach gave a start of surprise, but said nothing.  I waited for
his answer.

"Where is he?" I reiterated.  "Tell me!"

Mr. Leach placed his finger-tips together, and looked at me with an
expression almost like placid amusement.

"Mrs. Linton," he said slowly, "I am a man of business, and have seen
strange things in my time, so you mustn't be offended if I ask you a
question.  Mr. Linton had the money ready for us, you say.  In what
form was it?"

"In notes, sir," I replied.  "He told me you declined taking anything
else."

"Yes, yes--except gold.  So we did.  We are bound to be careful.
Now, Mrs. Linton--mind, I mean no offense--do you know that your
husband was much embarrassed?"

"I know he could pay all just debts--and unjust ones, too," I
answered, with rising indignation.

"Yes, of course.  All just and unjust debts.  All unjust debts--very
good.  Now, do you think it possible--ten thousand is a lot of
money--do you think it possible that Mr. Linton may have--well, in
plain English, decamped with it?"

I heard no more.  My face was flaming.  I rose and, without another
word, left the room.  I was in the cab before Mr. Leach had recovered
from his surprise, and in another minute was sobbing my poor heart
out on the shoulder of my maid--a faithful, good girl who loved me.

I can not tell you of the next few days.  The uncertainty of
everything, yet, to me, the utter hopelessness.  The dread of what
any moment might make known to me.  The searchers searching and
hoping to find--what?  For I knew that the success of their quest
could only bring me the dead body of my darling--murdered, perhaps,
for the sake of the money he carried.  Yet hardest of all to bear was
the knowledge that the sorrow manifested by those around me was only
assumed out of respect to me; that no one believed Walter to be dead;
that the wicked, cruel slander which had framed itself in Mr. Leach's
mind had entered into the minds of others.  I could read the thought
in the faces of all who came near me during those days.  I knew that
the paid seekers performed their task with a smile on their
lips--that the word went around among them that, in order to be
successful, the search should be, not for a dead, but for a living
man, to find whom it was needful to look further away.  How was it I
did not go mad?

I cared nothing when some one told me that the property, house, and
all were advertised for sale in a few weeks' time.  I thought of
nothing, saw nothing but the cold, still face of the one I loved.  I
wished for nothing now but to see his name cleared from the stain
thrown upon it--a stain he would have heeded more than death; this
done, I wished to die--that was all.  The wild thought which had at
first entered my head, that the men to whom he owed the money had
taken it and made away with him, was at last dispelled; for proof was
positive that Walter had not gone to Bristol on that fatal morning.
The passengers from the station were too few, and Walter too well
known not to have been noticed.  Indeed, no ticket for the class by
which he would certainly have traveled had been issued that day.  No
one had met him that morning, and he had disappeared without leaving
a trace; for people told me that every inch of the country near had
been scoured.  But I knew they deceived me, and that the wicked
thought was in every heart, although no one dared to speak it in
words to me who knew him and loved him.

Mr. Mainwaring, whom I had almost forgotten in my grief, came down in
the course of a few days.  Unfit as I was for business, I was
compelled to see him.  The kind old man was in great distress and
anxiety, but he was very good to me.  He started when he saw that I
had already put on mourning.

"It is dreadful," he said, with tears in his eyes, and taking both my
hands in his.  "Not that I care for the money so much--although, of
course, I must make up any deficiency myself, having been guilty of
such irregularity.  It is dreadful to think that I, who tried to help
Walter, must now strip his wife and children of their last shilling.
I trusted him so that I let him have my client's money simply on his
note-of-hand, bearing, of course, all responsibility myself.  It was
most irregular; but he was so urgent, and I wanted to help him.  Poor
girl!  I will do what I can for you, but I am afraid it can be but
little."

I begged him not to think of us, and thanked him again and again for
his great kindness.

"I would, if only in my own interests, pay the money again and stop
the sale; but no one has the power to mortgage the property to me.
We do not even know that Walter is dead.  It can not, can not be
true, what every one seems to hint at?" he added, almost shamefacedly.

I burst into a flood of tears and almost fell at his feet.

"Not you, Mr. Mainwaring!  Not you!" I sobbed out.  "You, who knew
him, and knew that dishonor was not in him!  Let me think that one,
at least, believes in my dead love.  Would to God, for my sake, it
were as people think, so that I might some day see him again."

The kind old friend raised me.

"No," he said; "I don't believe it.  I have known him from a boy, and
I knew his father before him.  They lie who say Walter Linton could
have done such a thing.  But it is all very, very dreadful."

Mr. Mainwaring slept at Draycot Hall that night, but I could not
bring myself to spend the evening in his company.  We could but think
or speak of one subject, and I felt I had no right to inflict my
grief upon him.  I should be better alone.  I watched the children
sink to sleep, and for some hours sat by their little white beds
listening to their regular breathing.  Then I kissed them all gently
and very quickly, lest my hot tears, falling on their upturned faces,
should awake them; and, near midnight, retired to what with me would
wrongly be called rest.  I locked the door of my room, undressed
myself, and sat in my dressing-gown over the fire, for the night
being damp and cold, my good maid had kindled a fire for me.

And there I sat, not seeking rest.  I knew that sleep and I must be
strangers for hours; that not until my strength was quite worn out
would sad thoughts cease and change to sadder dreams; not till at
last, from sheer fatigue they fell, would weary eyelids curtain
tearful eyes.  And so I sat, till slowly died the fire, and morning
air stole chilly through the room--thinking of all the joy and
sweetness of life so lately promised, all it gave me now.  It seemed
so hard to lose the one I loved--lost, as it were, in darkest night,
with none to say where he had wandered.

"Oh!" I cried, "if I could see you once and say farewell, although
your words came but from dying lips!  I should not grieve so much,
and for the sake of children dear to both might live, and even not go
mad."

The wind had risen with the night, and gusts now and again bore heavy
rain that beat against my window; whilst the tall trees round moaned
as the gale went tearing through their boughs.  The world seemed full
of dismal sounds and grief, and I the saddest in the world.  At last
sleep conquered sorrow, so I threw myself down on the bed and slept.
How long it was I slept I can not tell, for all the while I seemed
awake and seeing fearful sights.  Cruel voices whispered words that
stabbed my heart, so that in dreams I longed for wakefulness.  Then I
awoke and heard the wind and rain, louder and fiercer, whilst the
room looked strange as morning dawned in cheerless gray, and crept in
through the half turned blind.

I felt dazed.  For a moment I could scarcely realize where I was, or
quite recall what had happened.  I even turned, from force of habit,
to see if Walter, who should be by my side, was also awake.  Then, as
I saw the vacant pillow by mine, all came back to me--came back with
such a reflux of sorrow that, in my despair, I threw out my arms, and
sobbing bitterly, called on the one who could not hear me.  My right
hand lay as it had fallen, outside the coverlid, and, in a minute, I
almost shrieked with horror and alarm; for I felt another hand seek
it, touch it; and I experienced the sensation of fingers closing
round my own.  Hastily I tore my hand away from that clasp--if what
held without restraining, made itself distinctly felt without
offering resistance, can be called a clasp--and sprang from the bed.
Courageous as I am by nature, I trembled like a leaf, and had it been
dark when that unknown hand sought mine, my horror must have vented
itself in screams.  But the room was nearly light; so in a few
moments I conquered that overpowering fright and looked around for
the intruder.  I peered into every nook in which one might possibly
hide, but detected no one.  The door was as firmly locked as I left
it.  I was alone, for no one could have entered either by door or
window.  Then I sat down and reasoned with myself on my folly.  It
was fancy from a mind upset and overwrought with grief.  It was the
lingering impression left by one of those dreams--those dreadful
dreams which sleep had brought me!  It was a pure delusion, a
creation of my own, and I wondered if, as I feared at times, I was
going out of my senses.  Although I was able to persuade myself that
this reasoning was correct, I dared not return to my bed, but,
sitting once more in my chair, longed for broad daylight.

My thoughts soon wandered away from my recent fright, and took that
path which they always followed.  My arm dropped to my side, and my
fingers relaxed themselves.  And then, once more I felt that hand
creep to mine, take it, and hold it.  Again I felt the unmistakable
sensation of fingers that closed round mine.  I felt that there was
no hand in mine that my hand could clasp in return, but the sensation
of a palm against my palm--fingers twining my fingers--was
indisputable.  The sensation of pressure was there--faintly, it is
true, but it was there.  It was no fancy, no dream, this time.
Whether mortal or not, a hand, or the semblance of a hand, was
holding mine.  Again the horror overcame me--again I strove to tear
my hand away from this invisible clasp.  My blood curdled as I found
the result of my efforts failed on this second occasion--found that
the fingers which fastened on my own could not be shaken off, do what
I would.  As I moved my hand, even so the hand that held it moved
with it.  If I clinched my own, I could yet feel the strange pressure
of those unseen fingers.  If I grasped my right hand in my left,
there was still the sensation of another hand between my own.  Do
what I would, move how I would, that clasp, or phantom of a clasp,
was ever on my hand.  Yet I struggled with fear until the awful
thought flashed through my brain that this was the aura, the
forerunner of paralysis or epilepsy.  Then I could bear it no longer.
Whether that grasp was the result of bodily or mental ailment, I
could bear it no longer--I felt my mind was going.  I rushed to the
door, tore it open, and my screams rang through the house.  Remember,
I was but a woman, and alone.

As the sound of hurrying feet drew near, that hand or hand-clasp
lying on my own quitted it.  Then, as the strange sensation ceased,
did I hear a mournful sound, like a sigh, or was it only the wind
outside?  Did the phantom fingers draw themselves away from mine
soothingly, even, it seemed, reluctantly, or was that fancy too?  As
the servants with frightened looks drew near me, could that wild and
joyful thought that flashed through my brain be more than the thought
of a madwoman?  What could it mean?

Except for this I was myself again.  I had been frightened, I told
all who came to me--frightened by dreams, by shadows, by solitude,
and my own thoughts.  No one wondered at it; what flesh and blood
could stand, unmoved, the anxiety I had borne during the last week?
I was over-wrought and suffering from sleeplessness, so Mr.
Mainwaring insisted upon giving me an opiate.  I swallowed it
reluctantly, and my maid sat with me, until, in due time, dull sleep
told of the potency and efficacy of the drug which I had been made to
take.

This artificial sleep lasted without a break until late in the
afternoon.  Then I awoke refreshed, and in full possession of my
senses.  I arose and prayed, as I had never prayed before, that my
hand might again feel that unseen touch which had nearly driven me
mad in the night.  "Will it come again?  O, let it come again!" was
the constant cry of my heart; and I longed ardently for the night,
which, perhaps, might bring that hand seeking my own again.  For
incredible as it seems, I knew, when those fingers last left mine,
that love had in part conquered death--that Walter had been with me.
Now I feared nothing.  Why should I fear?  He had loved me living--he
loved me now.  Whether he came to me in body or in spirit, should he
not be welcome?  Oh, that he might come again!

And he came again.  Mr. Mainwaring, who would not leave Draycot that
day on account of the apparently strange state of my health, that
evening insisted upon my taking a turn in the garden.  I obeyed him,
although every plant, every blossom around, seemed breathing sadness.
I was too tired to walk for longer than a few minutes, but sat on my
favorite seat, and watched the sun sink behind the hills.  Even then
and there--in broad daylight--I felt his hand seek my own, and my
heart leaped with joy.  I shunned or strove to avoid it no longer.  I
let my hand lie still, and again I felt the touch, or the spirit of
the touch, of the one I loved.  So naturally those fingers closed
round mine; so familiar seemed that clasp to me, that could I have
forgotten the last week, I might have closed my eyes, and, lying
there with my hand in his, have thought I had only to open them to
happiness once more.  If I could but forget!

Even if I had not known in whose hand mine was resting, the caress
those fingers gave me would have told me.  I wondered why I feared
and repulsed them at first.  If only I could sometimes sit as I sat
then, and know and feel that Walter was beside me, I thought that
life might even be happy.  So I turned my head toward him, and said,
softly--so softly:

"Dearest love, you will come often and often, will you not?  You will
be always with me; then I shall not be unhappy."

He answered not, but I felt a change in the clasp of his hand, and I
pondered as to what its meaning could be.  Then I fancied that
faintly, very faintly, that touch was endeavoring to make me
understand something which my grosser earthly faculties failed to
grasp--to direct, to lead me somewhere for some purpose.  For it left
me and came again, left and came again, till at last I learned its
meaning.

Then and there I rose.  "I come, my love," I said.  And once more
Walter Linton and his wife walked, as they had walked many a time
before, hand-in-hand down the broad garden path; past the rustic
lodge, covered with rosebuds and woodbine; through the gateway; out
into the high road.  I feared nothing: the hand of the one I loved
was in mine, and guiding me whither he chose; moreover it was yet
daylight, and I was not dreaming.

I even knew that Mr. Mainwaring followed us as we walked down the
path.  I saw him come to my side and look at me with wonder.  I
wanted no one to be near my husband and myself, so I waved him back
imperiously.  "Follow if you like," I said, "but do not speak to us."
Perhaps he thought I was mad, perhaps that I was walking in my sleep,
and, if so, feared to awake me.  Any way, he followed us silently,
and that was all I knew or cared about him, or about anything else.
For were not my love and I walking, once more, hand-in-hand, and it
was not in a dream?

Along and along the road, each side of which is beautiful with its
green banks and hedges, and every inch of which we know, even keeping
to that side we always choose because the flowers grow thickest
there.  How fresh and green everything looks this evening!  The
swallows are flying here and there.  Every blade of grass is washed
clean from dust by the heavy rain of the morning.  No.  I am not
dreaming.  I am walking with my husband.  A nightingale breaks Into
song near us, as we walk.  We stop--who could help stopping to
listen?  Now its melody ceases, and Walter leads me on.  It is like
in the old days when we were first wed; before we thought or wished
for more wealth.  Those days when all the country round was fresh and
new to me.  Never did the wild-flowers, I think, look gayer than they
look this evening, although they are closing fast.  I would stop, my
darling, and gather a bunch for the children; but they have so many
flowers at home, and I fear to loose your hand for a moment.
Besides, you wish to lead me further yet; we have somewhere to go to
this evening.  I forget whither it was you told me, Walter.  Is it to
the lily-pond, to see if we can find any snow-white cups floating,
buoyed up by the broad green leaves?  Is it to climb the hill that
lies in front of us, and see the very last of the glorious sun; to
catch the crimson sparkle of its rays on the distant windows of our
dear home?  That sun which will rise to-morrow, and waken us both so
early--for you will never leave me again, Walter--promise me, my
darling--I have been so unhappy.  Is it further yet?  To the ruins of
the gray old abbey where the poet's ivy grows so freely?  Shall we
wait there, as once before, and see the full moon shine through the
rose of the east windows?  Shall we wander arm-in-arm through the dim
glades, laughing at the foolish monks who chose to live and die
there, knowing not love, nor the sweetness of life when two share its
joys and troubles?  But our troubles are over now, are they not,
dearest?  No matter, lead me whither you will: I care not--you are
with me, your hand is in mine, and I am happy.  But wherever we go,
we will walk back by moonlight, and then creep up quietly and kiss
the children just once before we go to bed.  To-morrow we will wake
and love again.  No, I am not dreaming.  But why do you not speak to
me and tell me where you have been--why you left me so long?  Oh, how
I have wept and waited for you!  Dearest, you will never leave me
again?

This is the spot you wished to lead me to--the place where the ferns
grow?  Ah, you remembered what I wanted.  Are there any of that sort
up there?  Let us go and see, although the day is flying fast.
Through the hazel bushes--deep, deep into the underwood--on and
on--up and up--brambles and stones!  I did not know it was so steep
here.  Hold my hand firmer and help me.  More bushes, more
undergrowth; and how the twilight fades!  My darling, we shall find
no ferns to-night.  May we not go back and come again to-morrow?  Yet
on, and on!  Love, where you lead I follow and fear not!  Is not your
hand in mine, and you will never leave me again!  Still on!  My
darling, you have brought me to the very edge of a rock!  Don't leave
me here!  Don't draw your hand from mine!  Stay one minute--one
moment longer!  I can not see you; it is dark and cold!  I can not
feel you, and the world seems filling again with grief.  Come back!
Come back!  Walter!  Walter!

They told me I dreamed it--that I walked in my sleep.  Clever and
learned men said so, and I am only a woman, neither clever nor
learned.  Mr. Mainwaring, who had with great difficulty followed
us--for I say "us," in spite of all that wisdom can urge--found me
lying lifeless at the brink of the rocky depth to which Walter had
led me, and where he had left me.  Down below me lay something that
I, thank God, never saw.  They bore it home and told me it was all
that was left of Walter Linton, my husband.  But I knew better, for
had he not that evening walked hand-in-hand with me for miles?  They
told me, also, that he had fallen from the top of the rock--that it
was not a great height, but high enough for the fall to kill him
instantaneously--that most likely he was led to that fatal place,
seeking some rare plant; as a root and withered leaves were clenched
in his hand--that the notes he had placed in his pocket when he left
his home were still there--that Draycot was still mine and his
children's.  But they believe me not when I tell them that my love,
my husband, through the power of the love he bore me, could come from
the dead--could take my hand In his and lead me with him, on and on,
till he showed me where and how he died--till he saved those he loved
from utter ruin and a life of penury--till, more than all, he cleared
his own dear memory from stain and dishonor.  Yet these things were!




THRAWN JANET

BY ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

_Robert Louis Balfour Stevenson was born in Edinburgh in 1850.  He
was graduated at Cambridge and studied law, which he abandoned for
literature.  In 1889 he settled in Samoa, where he died in 1894.  He
is the author of numerous essays, a delightful volume of poems called
"A Child's Garden of Verses," and many stories.  Stevenson's books
include: "Treasure Island"; "Kidnapped" and its sequel, "David
Balfour"; "The Black Arrow"; "Prince Otto"; "The Silverado
Squatters"; "New Arabian Nights"; "Island Nights' Entertainments";
"The Master of Ballantrae"; "An Inland Voyage"; "Travels with a
Donkey," and "The Ebb-Tide."_

_"Thrawn Janet" appeared in "The Merry Men and Other Tales."_



THRAWN JANET

By ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

The Reverend Murdoch Soulis was long minister of the moorland parish
of Balweary, in the vale of Dule.  A severe, bleak-faced old man,
dreadful to his hearers, he dwelt in the last years of his life,
without relative or servant or any human company, in the small and
lonely manse under the Hanging Shaw.  In spite of the iron composure
of his features, his eye was wild, scared, and uncertain; and when he
dwelt, in private admonitions, on the future of the impenitent, it
seemed as if his eye pierced through the storms of time to the
terrors of eternity.  Many young persons, coming to prepare
themselves against the season of the Holy Communion, were dreadfully
affected by his talk.  He had a sermon on 1st Peter, v. and 8th, "The
devil as a roaring lion," on the Sunday after every seventeenth of
August, and he was accustomed to surpass himself upon that text both
by the appalling nature of the matter and the terror of his bearing
in the pulpit.  The children were frightened into fits, and the old
looked more than usually oracular, and were, all that day, full of
those hints that Hamlet deprecated.  The manse itself, where it stood
by the water of Dule among some thick trees, with the Shaw
overhanging it on the one side, and on the other many cold, moorish
hilltops rising toward the sky, had begun, at a very early period of
Mr. Soulis's ministry, to be avoided in the dusk hours by all who
valued themselves upon their prudence; and guidmen sitting at the
clachan alehouse shook their heads together at the thought of passing
late by that uncanny neighborhood.  There was one spot, to be more
particular, which was regarded with especial awe.  The manse stood
between the high road and the water of Dule, with a gable to each;
its back was toward the kirktown of Balweary, nearly half a mile
away; in front of it, a bare garden, hedged with thorn, occupied the
land between the river and the road.  The house was two stories high,
with two large rooms on each.  It opened not directly on the garden,
but on a causewayed path, or passage, giving on the road on the one
hand, and closed on the other by the tall willows and elders that
bordered on the stream.  And it was this strip of causeway that
enjoyed among the young parishioners of Balweary so infamous a
reputation.  The minister walked there often after dark, sometimes
groaning aloud in the instancy of his unspoken prayers; and when he
was from home, and the manse door was locked, the more daring
schoolboys ventured, with beating hearts, to "follow my leader"
across that legendary spot.

This atmosphere of terror, surrounding, as it did, a man of God of
spotless character and orthodoxy, was a common cause of wonder and
subject of inquiry among the few strangers who were led by chance or
business into that unknown, outlying country.  But many even of the
people of the parish were ignorant of the strange events which had
marked the first year of Mr. Soulis's ministrations; and among those
who were better informed, some were naturally reticent, and others
shy of that particular topic.  Now and again, only, one of the older
folk would warm into courage over his third tumbler, and recount the
cause of the minister's strange looks and solitary life.

. . . . . . . . . . . .

Fifty years syne, when Mr. Soulis cam' first into Ba'weary, he was
still a young man--a callant, the folk said--fu' o' book learnin' and
grand at the exposition, but, as was natural in sae young a man, wi'
nae leevin' experience in religion.  The younger sort were greatly
taken wi' his gifts and his gab; but auld, concerned, serious men and
women were moved even to prayer for the young man, whom they took to
be a self-deceiver, and the parish that was like to be sae
ill-supplied.  It was before the days o' the moderates--weary fa'
them; but ill things are like guid--they baith come bit by bit, a
pickle at a time; and there were folk even then that said the Lord
had left the college professors to their ain devices, an' the lads
that went to study wi' them wad hae done mair and better sittin' in a
peat-bog, like their forebears of the persecution, wi' a Bible under
their oxter and a speerit o' prayer in their heart.  There was nae
doubt, onyway, but that Mr. Soulis had been ower lang at the college.
He was careful and troubled for mony things besides the ae thing
needful.  He had a feck o' books wi' him--mair than had ever been
seen before in a' that presbytery; and a sair wark the carrier had
wi' them, for they were a' like to have smoored in the Deil's Hag
between this and Kilmackerlie.  They were books o' divinity, to be
sure, or so they ca'd them; but the serious were o' opinion there was
little service for sae mony, when the hail o' God's Word would gang
in the neuk of a plaid.  Then he wad sit half the day and half the
nicht forbye, which was scant decent--writin', nae less; and first,
they were feared he wad read his sermons; and syne it proved he was
writin' a book himsel', which way surely no fittin' for ane of his
years an' sma' experience.

Onyway it behooved him to get an auld, decent wife to keep the manse
for him an' see to his bit denners; and he was recommended to an auld
limmer--Janet M'Clour, they ca'd her--and sae far left to himsel' as
to be ower persuaded.  There was mony advised him to the contrar, for
Janet was mair than suspeckit by the best folk in Ba'weary.  Lang or
that, she had had a wean to a dragoon; she hadnae come forrit for
maybe thretty year; and bairns had seen her mumblin' to hersel' up on
Key's Loan in the gloamin', whilk was an unco time an' place for a
God-fearin' woman.  Howsoever, it was the laird himsel' that had
first tauld the minister o' Janet; and in thae days he wad have gane
a far gate to pleesure the laird.  When folk tauld him that Janet was
sib to the deil, it was a' superstition by his way of it; an' when
they cast up the Bible to him an' the witch of Endor, he wad threep
it doun their thrapples that thir days were a' gane by, and the deil
was mercifully restrained.

Weel, when it got about the clachan that Janet M'Clour was to be
servant at the manse, the folk were fair mad wi' her an' him
thegether; and some o' the guidwives had nae better to dae than get
round her door cheeks and chairge her wi' a' that was ken't again
her, frae the sodger's bairn to John Tamson's twa kye.  She was nae
great speaker; folk usually let her gang her ain gate, an' she let
them gang theirs, wi' neither Fair-guid-een nor Fair-guid-day; but
when she buckled to she had a tongue to deave the miller.  Up she
got, an' there wasnae an auld story in Ba'weary but she gart somebody
lowp for it that day; they couldnae say ae thing but she could say
twa to it; till, at the hinder end, the guidwives up and claught haud
of her, and clawed the coats aff her back, and pu'd her doun the
clachan to the water o' Dule, to see if she were a witch or no, soum
or droun.  The carline skirled till ye could hear her at the Hangin'
Shaw, and she focht like ten; there was mony a guidwife bure the mark
of her neist day, an' mony a lang day after; and just in the hettest
o' the collteshangie, wha suld come up (for his sins) but the new
minister.

"Women," said he (and he had a grand voice), "I charge you in the
Lord's name to let her go."

Janet ran to him--she was fair wud wi' terror--an' clang to him an'
prayed him, for Christ's sake, save her frae the cummers; an' they,
for their pairt, tauld him a' that was ken't, and maybe mair.

"Woman," says he to Janet, "is this true?"

"As the Lord sees me," says she, "as the Lord made me, no a word o't.
Forbye the bairn," says she, "I've been a decent woman a' my days."

"Will you," says Mr. Soulis, "in the name of God, and before me, His
unworthy minister, renounce the devil and his works?"

Weel, it wad appear that when he askit that, she gave a girn that
fairly frichtit them that saw her, an' they could hear her teeth play
dirl thegether in her chafts; but there was naething for it but the
ae way or the ither; an' Janet lifted up her hand and renounced the
deil before them a'.

"And now," said Mr. Soulis to the guidwives, "home with ye, one and
all, and pray to God for His forgiveness."

And he gied Janet his arm, though she had little on her but a sark,
and took her up the clachan to her ain door like a leddy of the land;
an' her scrieghin' and laughin' as was a scandal to be heard.

There were mony grave folk lang ower their prayers that nicht; but
when the morn cam' there was sic a fear fell upon a' Ba'weary that
the bairns hid theirsels, and even the men-folk stood and keekit frae
their doors.  For there was Janet comin' doun the clachan--her or her
likeness, nane could tell--wi' her neck thrawn, and her heid on ae
side, like a body that has been hangit, and a girn on her face like
an unstreakit corp.  By an' by they got used wi' it, and even speered
at her to ken what was wrang; but frae that day forth she couldnae
speak like a Christian woman, but slavered and played click wi' her
teeth like a pair o' shears; and frae that day forth the name o' God
cam' never on her lips.  Whiles she wad try to say it, but it
michtnae be.  Them that kenned best said least; but they never gied
that Thing the name o' Janet M'Clour; for the auld Janet, by their
way o't, was in muckle hell that day.  But the minister was neither
to haud nor to bind; he preached about naething but the folk's
cruelty that had gi'en her a stroke of the palsy; he skelpt the
bairns that meddled her; and he had her up to the manse that same
nicht and dwalled there a' his lane wi' her under the Hangin' Shaw.

Weel, time gaed by: and the idler sort commenced to think mair
lichtly o' that black business.  The minister was weel thocht o'; he
was aye late at the writing, folk wad see his can'le doun by the Dule
water after twal' at e'en; and he seemed pleased wi' himsel' and
upsitten as at first, though a' body could see that he was dwining.
As for Janet she cam' an' she gaed; if she didnae speak muckle afore,
it was reason she should speak less then; she meddled naebody; but
she was an eldritch thing to see, an' nane wad hae mistrysted wi' her
for Ba'weary glebe.

About the end o' July there cam' a spell o' weather, the like o't
never was in that countryside; it was lown an' het an' heartless; the
herds couldnae win up the Black Hill, the bairns were ower weariet to
play; an' yet it was gousty too, wi' claps o' het wund that rumm'led
in the glens, and bits o' shouers that sleekened naething.  We aye
thocht it but to thun'er on the morn; but the morn cam', and the
morn's morning, and it was aye the same uncanny weather, sair on
folks and bestial.  Of a' that were the waur, nane suffered like Mr.
Soulis; he could neither sleep nor eat, he tauld his elders; an' when
he wasnae writin' at his weary book, he wad be stravaguin' ower a'
the countryside like a man possessed, when a' body else was blythe to
keep caller ben the house.

Abune Hangin' Shaw, in the bield o' the Black Hill, there's a bit
inclosed grund wi' an iron yett; and it seems, in the auld days, that
was the kirkyaird o' Ba'weary, and consecrated by the Papists before
the blessed licht shone upon the kingdom.  It was a great howff o'
Mr. Soulis's, onyway; there he would sit an' consider his sermons;
and indeed it's a bieldy bit.  Weel, as he cam' ower the wast end o'
the Black Hill, ae day, he saw first twa, an' syne fower, an' syne
seeven corbie craws fleein' round an' round abune the auld kirkyaird.
They flew laigh and heavy, an' squawked to ither as they gaed; and it
was clear to Mr. Soulis that something had put them frae their
ordinar.  He wasnae easy fleyed, an' gaed straucht up to the wa's;
an' what suld he find there but a man, or the appearance of a man,
sittin' in the inside upon a grave.  He was of a great stature, an'
black as hell, and his e'en were singular to see.  Mr. Soulis had
heard tell o' black men, mony's the time; but there was something
unco about this black man that daunted him.  Het as he was, he took a
kind o' cauld grue in the marrow o' his banes; but up he spak for a'
that; an' says he: "My friend, are you a stranger in this place?"
The black man answered never a word; he got upon his feet, an' begude
to hirsle to the wa' on the far side; but he aye lookit at the
minister; an' the minister stood an' lookit back; till a' in a
meenute the black man was ower the wa' an' rinnin' for the bield o'
the trees.  Mr. Soulis, he hardly kenned why, ran after him; but he
was sair forjaskit wi' his walk an' the het, unhalesome weather; and
rin as he likit, he got nae mair than a glisk o' the black man amang
the birks, till he won doun to the foot o' the hillside, an' there he
saw him ance mair, gaun, hap, step, an' lowp, ower Dule water to the
manse.

Mr. Soulis wasnae weel pleased that this fearsome gangrel suld mak'
sae free wi' Ba'weary manse; an' he ran the harder, an', wet shoon,
ower the burn, an' up the walk; but the deil a black man was there to
see.  He stepped out upon the road, but there was naebody there; he
gaed a' ower the gairden, but na, nae black man.  At the hinder end,
and a bit feared as was but natural, he lifted the hasp and into the
manse; and there was Janet M'Clour before his een, wi' her thrawn
craig, and nane sae pleased to see him.  And he aye minded sinsyne,
when first he set his een upon her, he had the same cauld and deidly
grue.

"Janet," says he, "have you seen a black man?"

"A black man?" quo' she.  "Save us a'!  Ye're no wise, minister.
There's nae black man in a' Ba'weary."

But she didnae speak plain, ye maun understand; but yam-yammered,
like a powney wi' the bit in its moo.

"Weel," says he, "Janet, if there was nae black man, I have spoken
with the Accuser of the Brethren."

And he sat down like ane wi' a fever, an' his teeth chittered in his
heid.

"Hoots," says she, "think shame to yoursel', minister;" an' gied him
a drap brandy that she keept aye by her.

Syne Mr. Soulis gaed into his study amang a' his books.  It's a lang,
laigh, mirk chalmer, perishin' cauld in winter, an' no very dry even
in the tap o' the simmer, for the manse stands near the burn.  Sae
doun he sat, and thocht of a' that had come an' gane since he was in
Ba'weary, an' his hame, an' the days when he was a bairn an' ran
daffin' on the braes; and that black man aye ran in his heid like the
owercome of a sang.  Aye the mair he thocht, the mair he thocht o'
the black man.  He tried the prayer, an' the words wouldnae come to
him; an' he tried, they say, to write at his book, but he couldnae
mak' nae mair o' that.  There was whiles he thocht the black man was
at his oxter, an' the swat stood upon him cauld as well-water; and
there was other whiles, when he cam' to himsel' like a christened
bairn and minded naething.

The upshot was that he gaed to the window an' stood glowrin' at Dule
water.  The trees are unco thick, an' the water lies deep an' black
under the manse; an' there was Janet washin' the cla'es wi' her coats
kilted.  She had her back to the minister, an' he, for his pairt,
hardly kenned what he was lookin' at.  Syne she turned round, an'
shawed her face; Mr. Soulis had the same cauld grue as twice that day
afore, an' it was borne in upon him what folk said, that Janet was
deid lang syne, an' this was a bogle in her clay cauld flesh.  He
drew back a pickle and he scanned her narrowly.  She was
tramp-trampin' in the cla'es, croonin' to hersel'; and eh! Gude guide
us, but it was a fearsome face.  Whiles she sang louder, but there
was nae man born o' woman that could tell the words o' her sang; an'
whiles she lookit side-lang doun, but there was naething there for
her to look at.  There gaed a scunner through the flesh upon his
banes; and that was Heeven's advertisement.  But Mr. Soulis just
blamed himsel', he said, to think sae ill of a puir, auld afflicted
wife that hadnae a freend forby himsel'; and he put up a bit prayer
for him and her, an' drank a little caller water--for his heart rose
again the meat--an' gaed up to his naked bed in the gloaming.

That was a nicht that has never been forgotten in Ba'weary, the nicht
o' the seeventeenth of August, seeventeen hun'er' and twal'.  It had
been het afore, as I hae said, but that nicht it was hetter than
ever.  The sun gaed doun amang unco-lookin' clouds; it fell as mirk
as the pit; no a star, no a breath o' wund; ye couldnae see your han'
afore your face, and even the auld folk cuist the covers frae their
beds and lay pechin' for their breath.  Wi' a' that he had upon his
mind, it was gey and unlikely Mr. Soulis wad get muckle sleep.  He
lay an' he tummled; the gude, caller bed that he got into brunt his
very banes; whiles he slept, and whiles he waukened; whiles he heard
the time o' nicht, and whiles a tyke yowlin' up the muir, as if
somebody was deid; whiles he thocht he heard bogles claverin' in his
lug, an' whiles he saw spunkies in the room.  He behooved, he judged,
to be sick; an' sick he was--little he jaloosed the sickness.

At the hinder end, he got a clearness in his mind, sat up in his sark
on the bedside, and fell thinkin' ance mair o' the black man an'
Janet.  He couldnae weel tell how--maybe it was the cauld to his
feet--but it cam' in upon him wi' a spate that there was some
connection between thir twa, an' that either or baith o' them were
bogles.  And just at that moment, in Janet's room, which was neist to
his, there cam' a stramp o' feet as if men were wars'lin', an' then a
loud bang; an' then a wund gaed reishling round the fower quarters of
the house; an' then a' was aince mair as seelent as the grave.

Mr. Soulis was feared for neither man nor deevil.  He got his tinder
box, an' lighted a can'le, an' made three steps o't ower to Janet's
door.  It was on the hasp, an' he pushed it open, an' keeked bauldly
in.  It was a big room, as big as the minister's ain, an' plenished
wi' grand, auld, solid gear, for he had naething else.  There was a
fower-posted bed wi' auld tapestry; and a braw cabinet of aik, that
was fu' o' the minister's divinity books, an' put there to be out o'
the gate; an' a wheen duds o' Janet's lying here and there about the
floor.  But nae Janet could Mr. Soulis see; nor ony sign of a
contention.  In he gaed (an' there's few that wad ha'e followed him)
an' lookit a' round, an' listened.  But there was naethin' to be
heard, neither inside the manse nor in a' Ba'weary parish, an'
naethin' to be seen but the muckle shadows turnin' round the can'le.
An' then a' at aince, the minister's heart played dunt an' stood
stock-still; an' a cauld wund blew amang the hairs o' his heid.
Whaten a weary sicht was that for the puir man's een!  For there was
Janet hangin' frae a nail beside the auld aik cabinet: her heid aye
lay on her shoother, her een were steeked, the tongue projekit frae
her mouth, and her heels were twa feet clear abune the floor.

"God forgive us all!" thocht Mr. Soulis; "poor Janet's dead."

He cam' a step nearer to the corp; an' then his heart fair whammled
in his inside.  For by what cantrip it wad ill-beseem a man to judge,
she was hingin' frae a single nail an' by a single wursted thread for
darnin' hose.

It's an awfu' thing to be your lane at nicht wi' siccan prodigies o'
darkness; but Mr. Soulis was strong in the Lord.  He turned an' gaed
his ways oot o' that room, and lockit the door ahint him; and step by
step, doon the stairs, as heavy as leed; and set doon the can'le on
the table at the stairfoot.  He couldnae pray, he couldnae think, he
was dreepin' wi' caul' swat, an' naething could he hear but the
dunt-dunt-duntin' o' his ain heart.  He micht maybe have stood there
an hour, or maybe twa, he minded sae little; when a' o' a sudden he
heard a laigh, uncanny steer upstairs; a foot gaed to an' fro in the
cha'mer whaur the corp was hingin'; syne the door was opened, though
he minded weel that he had lockit it; an' syne there was a step upon
the landin', an' it seemed to him as if the corp was lookin' ower the
rail and doun upon him whaur he stood.

He took up the can'le again (for he couldnae want the licht) and, as
saftly as ever he could, gaed straucht out o' the manse an' to the
far end o' the causeway.  It was aye pit-mirk; the flame o' the
can'le, when he set it on the grund, brunt steedy and clear as in a
room; naething moved, but the Dule water seepin' and sabbin' doon the
glen, an' yon unhaly footstep that cam' ploddin' doun the stairs
inside the manse.  He kenned the foot ower weel, for it was Janet's;
and at ilka step that cam' a wee thing nearer, the cauld got deeper
in his vitals.  He commended his soul to Him that made an' keepit
him; "and O Lord," said he, "give me strength this night to war
against the powers of evil."

By this time the foot was comin' through the passage for the door; he
could hear a hand skirt alang the wa', as if the fearsome thing was
feelin' for its way.  The saughs tossed an' maned thegether, a lang
sigh cam' ower the hills, the flame o' the can'le was blawn aboot;
an' there stood the corp of Thrawn Janet, wi' her grogram goun an'
her black mutch, wi' the heid aye upon the shouther, an' the girn
still upon the face o't--leevin', ye wad hae said--deid, as Mr.
Soulis weel kenned--upon the threshold o' the manse.

It's a strange thing that the saul of man should be that thirled into
his perishable body; but the minister saw that, an' his heart didnae
break.

She didnae stand there lang; she began to move again an' cam' slowly
toward Mr. Soulis whaur he stood under the saughs.  A' the life o'
his body, a' the strength o' his speerit, were glowerin' frae his
een.  It seemed she was gaun to speak, but wanted words, an' made a
sign wi' the left hand.  There cam' a clap o' wund, like a cat's
fuff; oot gaed the can'le, the saughs skrieghed like folk; an' Mr.
Soulis kenned that, live or die, this was the end o't.

"Witch, beldame, devil!" he cried, "I charge you, by the power of
God, begone--if you be dead, to the grave--if you be damned, to hell."

An' at that moment the Lord's ain hand out o' the Heevens struck the
Horror whaur it stood; the auld, deid, desecrated corp o' the
witch-wife, sae lang keepit frae the grave and hirsled round by
deils, lowed up like a brunstane spunk and fell in ashes to the
grund; the thunder followed, peal on dirling peal, the rairing rain
upon the back o' that; and Mr. Soulis lowped through the garden
hedge, and ran, wi' skelloch upon skelloch, for the clachan.

That same mornin', John Christie saw the Black Man pass the Muckle
Cairn as it was chappin' six; before eicht, he gaed by the
change-house at Knockdow; an' no lang after, Sandy M'Lellan saw him
gaun linkin' doun the braes frae Kilmackerlie.  There's little doubt
but it was him that dwalled sae lang in Janet's body; but he was awa'
at last; and sinsyne the deil has never fashed us in Ba'weary.

But it was a sair dispensation for the minister; lang, lang he lay
ravin' in his bed; and frae that hour to this, he was the man ye ken
the day.




A CHRISTMAS CAROL

BY CHARLES DICKENS

_Charles Dickens was a stanch friend not only of the child but of all
humanity.  No writer, perhaps, has succeeded in portraying so
strikingly the humorous and pathetic in human character.  Much of
Dickens's reputation for ability in this direction is due to his
success with the particular story given herewith.  The man or woman
who does not know Scrooge, the Ghost that scared him half to death,
and what this story stands for, has still something to learn, both of
literature and of life._



A CHRISTMAS CAROL

By CHARLES DICKENS


STAVE ONE

_Marley's Ghost_

Marley was dead: to begin with.  There is no doubt whatever about
that.  The register of his burial was signed by the clergyman, the
clerk, the undertaker, and the chief mourner.  Scrooge signed it: and
Scrooge's name was good upon 'Change, for anything he chose to put
his hand to.  Old Marley was dead as a doornail.

Mind!  I don't mean to say that I know, of my own knowledge, what
there is particularly dead about a door-nail.  I might have been
inclined, myself, to regard a coffin-nail as the deadest piece of
ironmongery in the trade.  But the wisdom of our ancestors is in the
simile; and my unhallowed hands shall not disturb it, or the
Country's done for.  You will therefore permit me to repeat,
emphatically, that Marley was dead as a door-nail.

Scrooge knew he was dead?  Of course he did.  How could it be
otherwise?  Scrooge and he were partners for I don't know how many
years.  Scrooge was his sole executor, his sole administrator, his
sole assign, his sole residuary legatee, his sole friend, and sole
mourner.  And even Scrooge was not so dreadfully cut up by the sad
event, but that he was an excellent man of business on the very day
of the funeral, and solemnized it with an undoubted bargain.

The mention of Marley's funeral brings me back to the point I started
from.  There is no doubt that Marley was dead.  This must be
distinctly understood, or nothing wonderful can come of the story I
am going to relate.  If we were not perfectly convinced that Hamlet's
Father died before the play began, there would be nothing more
remarkable in his taking a stroll at night, in an easterly wind, upon
his own ramparts, than there would be in any other middle-aged
gentleman rashly turning out after dark in a breezy spot--say Saint
Paul's Churchyard for instance--literally to astonish his son's weak
mind.

Scrooge never painted out Old Marley's name.  There it stood, years
afterward, above the warehouse door: Scrooge and Marley.  The firm
was known as Scrooge and Marley.  Sometimes people new to the
business called Scrooge Scrooge, and sometimes Marley, but he
answered to both names: it was all the same to him.

Oh!  But he was a tight-fisted hand at the grindstone, Scrooge! a
squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous, old
sinner!  Hard and sharp as flint, from which no steel had ever struck
out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an
oyster.  The cold within him froze his old features, nipped his
pointed nose, shriveled his cheek, stiffened his gait; made his eyes
red, his thin lips blue; and spoke out shrewdly in his grating voice.
A frosty rime was on his head, and on his eyebrows, and his wiry
chin.  He carried his own low temperature always about with him; he
iced his office in the dog-days; and didn't thaw it one degree at
Christmas.

External heat and cold had little influence on Scrooge.  No warmth
could warm, nor wintry weather chill him.  No wind that blew was
bitterer than he, no falling snow was more intent upon its purpose,
no pelting rain less open to entreaty.  Foul weather didn't know
where to have him.  The heaviest rain, and snow, and hail, and sleet,
could boast of the advantage over him in only one respect.  They
often "came down" handsomely, and Scrooge never did.

Nobody ever stopped him in the street to say, with gladsome looks,
"My dear Scrooge, how are you?  When will you come to see me?"  No
beggars implored him to bestow a trifle, no children asked him what
it was o'clock, no man or woman ever once in all his life inquired
the way to such and such a place, of Scrooge.  Even the blind men's
dogs appeared to know him; and when they saw him coming on, would tug
their owners into doorways and up courts; and then would wag their
tails as though they said, "No eye at all is better than an evil eye,
dark master!"

But what did Scrooge care?  It was the very thing he liked.  To edge
his way along the crowded paths of life, warning all human sympathy
to keep its distance, was what the knowing ones call "nuts" to
Scrooge.

Once upon a time--of all the good days in the year, on Christmas
Eve--old Scrooge sat busy in his counting-house.  It was cold, bleak,
biting weather: foggy withal: and he could hear the people in the
court outside go wheezing up and down, beating their hands upon their
breasts, and stamping their feet upon the pavement stones to warm
them.  The city clocks had only just gone three, but it was quite
dark already: it had not been light all day: and candles were flaring
in the windows of the neighboring offices, like ruddy smears upon the
palpable brown air.  The fog came pouring in at every chink and
keyhole, and was so dense without, that although the court was of the
narrowest, the houses opposite were mere phantoms.  To see the dingy
cloud come drooping down, obscuring everything, one might have
thought that Nature lived hard by, and was brewing on a large scale.

The door of Scrooge's counting-house was open, that he might keep his
eye upon his clerk, who in a dismal little cell beyond, a sort of
tank, was copying letters.  Scrooge had a very small fire, but the
clerk's fire was so very much smaller that it looked like one coal.
But he couldn't replenish it, for Scrooge kept the coal-box in his
own room; and so surely as the clerk came in with the shovel, the
master predicted that it would be necessary for them to part.
Wherefore the clerk put on his white comforter, and tried to warm
himself at the candle; in which effort, not being a man of a strong
imagination, he failed.

"A merry Christmas, uncle!  God save you!" cried a cheerful voice.
It was the voice of Scrooge's nephew, who came upon him so quickly
that this was the first intimation he had of his approach.

"Bah!" said Scrooge, "humbug!"

He had so heated himself with rapid walking in the fog and frost,
this nephew of Scrooge's, that he was all in a glow; his face was
ruddy and handsome!  his eyes sparkled, and his breath smoked again.

"Christmas a humbug, uncle!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "You don't mean
that, I am sure."

"I do," said Scrooge.  "Merry Christmas!  What right have you to be
merry?  What reason have you to be merry?  You're poor enough."

"Come, then," returned the nephew gaily.  "What right have you to be
dismal?  What reason have you to be morose?  You're rich enough."

Scrooge having no better answer ready on the spur of the moment, said
"Bah!" again; and followed it up with "Humbug!"

"Don't be cross, uncle," said the nephew.

"What else can I be," returned the uncle, "when I live in such a
world of fools as this?  Merry Christmas!  Out upon merry Christmas!
What's Christmas time to you but a time for paying bills without
money; a time for finding yourself a year older, but not an hour
richer; a time for balancing your books and having every item in 'em
through a round dozen of months presented dead against you?  If I
could work my will," said Scrooge indignantly, "every idiot who goes
about with 'Merry Christmas' on his lips should be boiled with his
own pudding, and buried with a stake of holly through his heart.  He
should!"

"Uncle!" pleaded the nephew.

"Nephew!" returned the uncle sternly, "keep Christmas in your own
way, and let me keep it in mine."

"Keep it!" repeated Scrooge's nephew.  "But you don't keep it."

"Let me leave it alone, then," said Scrooge.  "Much good may it do
you!  Much good it has ever done you!"

"There are many things from which I might have derived good, by which
I have not profited, I dare say," returned the nephew; "Christmas
among the rest.  But I am sure I have always thought of Christmas
time, when it has come round--apart from the veneration due to its
sacred name and origin, if anything belonging to it can be apart from
that--as a good time: a kind, forgiving, charitable, pleasant time:
the only time I know of, in the long calendar of the year, when men
and women seem by one consent to open their shut-up hearts freely,
and to think of people below them as if they really were
fellow-passengers to the grave, and not another race of creatures
bound on other journeys.  And therefore, uncle, though it has never
put a scrap of gold or silver in my pocket, I believe that it _has_
done me good, and _will_ do me good; and I say, God bless it!"

The clerk in the Tank involuntarily applauded: becoming immediately
sensible of the impropriety, he poked the fire, and extinguished the
last frail spark forever.

"Let me hear another sound from _you_," said Scrooge, "and you'll
keep your Christmas by losing your situation.  You're quite a
powerful speaker, sir," he added, turning to his nephew.  "I wonder
you don't go into Parliament."

"Don't be angry, uncle.  Come!  Dine with us to-morrow."

Scrooge said that he would see him--yes, indeed he did.  He went the
whole length of the expression, and said that he would see him in
that extremity first.

"But why?" cried Scrooge's nephew.  "Why?"

"Why did you get married?" said Scrooge.

"Because I fell in love."

"Because you fell in love!" growled Scrooge, as if that were the only
one thing in the world more ridiculous than a merry Christmas.
"Good-afternoon!"

"Nay, uncle, but you never came to see me before that happened.  Why
give it as a reason for not coming now?"

"Good-afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I want nothing from you; I ask nothing of you; why can not we be
friends?"

"Good-afternoon," said Scrooge.

"I am sorry, with all my heart, to find you so resolute.  We have
never had any quarrel to which I have been a party.  But I have made
the trial in homage to Christmas, and I'll keep my Christmas humor to
the last.  So a Merry Christmas, uncle!"

"Good-afternoon!" said Scrooge.

"And a Happy New Year!"

"Good-afternoon!" said Scrooge.

His nephew left the room without an angry word, notwithstanding.  He
stopped at the outer door to bestow the greetings of the season on
the clerk, who, cold as he was, was warmer than Scrooge; for he
returned them cordially.

"There's another fellow," muttered Scrooge, who overheard him; "my
clerk, with fifteen shillings a week, and a wife and family, talking
about a merry Christmas.  I'll retire to Bedlam."

This lunatic, in letting Scrooge's nephew out, had let two other
people in.  They were portly gentlemen, pleasant to behold, and now
stood, with their hats off, in Scrooge's office.  They had books and
papers in their hands, and bowed to him.

"Scrooge and Marley's, I believe," said one of the gentlemen,
referring to his list.  "Have I the pleasure of addressing Mr.
Scrooge, or Mr. Marley?"

"Mr. Marley has been dead these seven years," Scrooge replied.  "He
died seven years ago, this very night."

"We have no doubt his liberality is well represented by his surviving
partner," said the gentleman, presenting his credentials.

It certainly was; for they had been two kindred spirits.  At the
ominous word "liberality," Scrooge frowned, and shook his head, and
handed the credentials back.

"At this festive season of the year, Mr. Scrooge," said the
gentleman, taking up a pen, "it is more than usually desirable that
we should make some slight provision for the poor and destitute, who
suffer greatly at the present time.  Many thousands are in want of
common necessaries; hundreds of thousands are in want of common
comforts, sir."

"Are there no prisons?" asked Scrooge.

"Plenty of prisons," said the gentleman, laying down the pen again.

"And the Union workhouses?" demanded Scrooge.  "Are they still in
operation?"

"They are.  Still," returned the gentleman, "I wish I could say they
were not."

"The Treadmill and the Poor Law are in full vigor, then?" said
Scrooge.

"Both very busy, sir."

"Oh!  I was afraid, from what you said at first, that something had
occurred to stop them in their useful course," said Scrooge.  "I'm
very glad to hear it."

"Under the impression that they scarcely furnish Christian cheer of
mind or body to the multitude," returned the gentleman, "a few of us
are endeavoring to raise a fund to buy the Poor some meat and drink,
and means of warmth.  We choose this time, because it is a time, of
all others, when Want is keenly felt, and Abundance rejoices.  What
shall I put you down for?"

"Nothing!" Scrooge replied.

"You wish to be anonymous?"

"I wish to be left alone," said Scrooge.  "Since you ask me what I
wish, gentlemen, that is my answer.  I don't make merry myself at
Christmas, and I can't afford to make idle people merry.  I help to
support the establishments I have mentioned: they cost enough: and
those who are badly off must go there."

"Many can't go there; and many would rather die."

"If they would rather die," said Scrooge, "they had better do it, and
decrease the surplus population.  Besides--excuse me--I don't know
that."

"But you might know it," observed the gentleman.

"It's not my business," Scrooge returned.  "It's enough for a man to
understand his own business, and not to interfere with other
people's.  Mine occupies me constantly.  Good afternoon, gentlemen!"

Seeing clearly that it would be useless to pursue their point, the
gentlemen withdrew.  Scrooge resumed his labors with an improved
opinion of himself, and in a more facetious temper than was usual
with him.

Meanwhile the fog and darkness thickened so that people ran about
with flaring links, proffering their services to go before horses in
carriages and conduct them on their way.  The ancient tower of a
church, whose gruff old bell was always peeping slyly down at Scrooge
out of a gothic window in the wall, became invisible, and struck the
hours and quarters in the clouds, with tremulous vibrations afterward
as if its teeth were chattering in its frozen head up there.  The
cold became intense.  In the main street at the corner of the court,
some laborers were repairing the gas-pipes, and had lighted a great
fire in a brazier, round which a party of ragged men and boys were
gathered: warming their hands and winking their eyes before the blaze
in rapture.  The water-plug being left in solitude, its overflowings
sullenly congealed, and turned to misanthropic ice.  The brightness
of the shops, where holly sprigs and berries crackled in the lamp
heat of the windows, made pale faces ruddy as they passed.
Poulterers' and grocers' trades became a splendid joke: a glorious
pageant, with which it was next to impossible to believe that such
dull principles as bargain and sale had anything to do.  The Lord
Mayor, in the stronghold of the mighty Mansion House, gave orders to
his fifty cooks and butlers to keep Christmas as a Lord Mayor's
household should; and even the little tailor, whom he had fined five
shillings on the previous Monday for being drunk and bloodthirsty in
the streets, stirred up to-morrow's pudding in his garret, while his
lean wife and the baby sallied out to buy the beef.

Foggier yet, and colder!  Piercing, searching, biting cold.  If the
good Saint Dunstan had but nipped the Evil Spirit's nose with a touch
of such weather as that, instead of using his familiar weapons, then
indeed he would have roared to lusty purpose.  The owner of one scant
young nose, gnawed and mumbled by the hungry cold as bones are gnawed
by dogs, stooped down at Scrooge's keyhole to regale him with a
Christmas carol: but at the first sound of

  "God bless you, merry gentleman!
  May nothing you dismay!"

Scrooge seized the ruler with such energy of action that the singer
fled in terror, leaving the keyhole to the fog and even more
congenial frost.

At length the hour of shutting up the counting-house arrived.  With
an ill-will Scrooge dismounted from his stool, and tacitly admitted
the fact to the expectant clerk in the Tank, who instantly snuffed
his candle out, and put on his hat.

"You'll want all day to-morrow, I suppose?" said Scrooge.

"If quite convenient, sir."

"It's not convenient," said Scrooge, "and it's not fair.  If I was to
stop half-a-crown for it, you'd think yourself ill-used, I'll be
bound?"

The clerk smiled faintly.

"And yet," said Scrooge, "you don't think me ill-used, when I pay a
day's wages for no work."

The clerk observed that it was only once a year.

"A poor excuse for picking a man's pocket every twenty-fifth of
December!" said Scrooge, buttoning his great-coat to the chin.  "But
I suppose you must have the whole day.  Be here all the earlier next
morning!"

The clerk promised that he would; and Scrooge walked out with a
growl.  The office was closed in a twinkling, and the clerk, with the
long ends of his white comforter dangling below his waist (for he
boasted no great-coat), went down a slide on Cornhill, at the end of
a lane of boys, twenty times, in honor of its being Christmas Eve,
and then ran home to Camden Town as hard as he could pelt, to play at
blindman's buff.

Scrooge took his melancholy dinner in his usual melancholy tavern;
and having read all the newspapers, and beguiled the rest of the
evening with his banker's-book, went home to bed.  He lived in
chambers which had once belonged to his deceased partner.  They were
a gloomy suite of rooms, in a lowering pile of building up a yard,
where it had so little business to be, that one could scarcely help
fancying it must have run there when it was a young house, playing at
hide-and-seek with other houses, and have forgotten the way out
again.  It was old enough now, and dreary enough, for nobody lived in
it but Scrooge, the other rooms being all let out as offices.  The
yard was so dark that even Scrooge, who knew its every stone, was
fain to grope with his hands.  The fog and frost so hung about the
black old gateway of the house that it seemed as if the Genius of the
Weather sat in mournful meditation on the threshold.

Now, it is a fact, that there was nothing at all particular about the
knocker on the door, except that it was very large.  It is also a
fact, that Scrooge had seen it, night and morning, during his whole
residence in that place; also that Scrooge had as little of what is
called fancy about him as any man in the City of London, even
including--which is a bold word--the corporation, aldermen, and
livery.  Let it also be borne in mind that Scrooge had not bestowed
one thought on Marley, since his last mention of his seven-years'
dead partner that afternoon.  And then let any man explain to me, if
he can, how it happened that Scrooge, having his key in the lock of
the door, saw in the knocker, without its undergoing any intermediate
process of change: not a knocker, but Marley's face.

Marley's face.  It was not in impenetrable shadow as the other
objects in the yard were, but had a dismal light about it, like a bad
lobster in a dark cellar.  It was not angry or ferocious, but looked
at Scrooge as Marley used to look: with ghostly spectacles turned up
on its ghostly forehead.  The hair was curiously stirred, as if by
breath or hot air; and, though the eyes were wide open, they were
perfectly motionless.  That, and its livid color, made it horrible;
but its horror seemed to be in spite of the face and beyond its
control, rather than a part of its own expression.

As Scrooge looked fixedly at this phenomenon, it was a knocker again.

To say that he was not startled, or that his blood was not conscious
of a terrible sensation to which it had been a stranger from infancy,
would be untrue.  But he put his hand upon the key he had
relinquished, turned it sturdily, walked in, and lighted his candle.

He _did_ pause, with a moment's irresolution, before he shut the
door; and he _did_ look cautiously behind it first, as if he
half-expected to be terrified with the sight of Marley's pigtail
sticking out into the hall.  But there was nothing on the back of the
door, except the screws and nuts that held the knocker on; so he said
"Pooh, pooh!" and closed it with a bang.

The sound resounded through the house like thunder.  Every room
above, and every cask in the wine-merchant's cellars below, appeared
to have a separate peal of echoes of its own.  Scrooge was not a man
to be frightened by echoes.  He fastened the door, and walked across
the hall, and up the stairs: slowly, too, trimming his candle as he
went.

You may talk vaguely about driving a coach-and-six up a good old
flight of stairs, or through a bad young Act of Parliament; but I
mean to say you might have got a hearse up that staircase, and taken
it broadwise, with the splinter-bar toward the wall, and the door
toward the balustrades: and done it easy.  There was plenty of width
for that, and room to spare; which is perhaps the reason why Scrooge
thought he saw a locomotive hearse going on before him in the gloom.
Half-a-dozen gas-lamps out of the street wouldn't have lighted the
entry too well, so you may suppose that it was pretty dark with
Scrooge's dip.

Up Scrooge went, not caring a button for that: darkness is cheap, and
Scrooge liked it.  But before he shut his heavy door, he walked
through his rooms to see that all was right.  He had just enough
recollection of the face to desire to do that.

Sitting-room, bedroom, lumber-room.  All as they should be.  Nobody
under the table, nobody under the sofa; a small fire in the grate;
spoon and basin ready; and the little saucepan of gruel (Scrooge had
a cold in his head) upon the Bob.  Nobody under the bed; nobody in
the closet; nobody in his dressing-gown, which was hanging up in a
suspicious attitude against the wall.  Lumber-room as usual.  Old
fireguard, old shoes, two fish-baskets, washing-stand on three legs,
and a poker.

Quite satisfied, he closed his door, and locked himself in;
double-locked himself in, which was not his custom.  Thus secured
against surprise, he took off his cravat; put on his dressing-gown
and slippers, and his nightcap; and sat down before the fire to take
his gruel.

It was a very low fire indeed; nothing on such a bitter night.  He
was obliged to sit close to it, and brood over it, before he could
extract the least sensation of warmth from such a handful of fuel.
The fireplace was an old one, built by some Dutch merchant long ago,
and paved all round with quaint Dutch tiles, designed to illustrate
the Scriptures.  There were Cains and Abels, Pharaohs' daughters,
Queens of Sheba, Angelic messengers descending through the air on
clouds like feather-beds, Abrahams, Belshazzars, Apostles putting off
to sea in butter-boats, hundreds of figures, to attract his thoughts;
and yet that face of Marley, seven years dead, came like the ancient
Prophet's rod, and swallowed up the whole.  If each smooth tile had
been a blank at first, with power to shape some picture on its
surface from the disjointed fragments of his thoughts, there would
have been a copy of old Marley's head on every one.

"Humbug!" said Scrooge; and walked across the room.

After several turns, he sat down again.  As he threw his head back in
the chair, his glance happened to rest upon a bell, a disused bell,
that hung in the room, and communicated for some purpose now
forgotten with a chamber in the highest story of the building.  It
was with great astonishment, and with a strange, inexplicable dread,
that as he looked, he saw this bell begin to swing.  It swung so
softly in the outset that it scarcely made a sound; but soon it rang
out loudly, and so did every bell in the house.

This might have lasted half a minute, or a minute, but it seemed an
hour.  The bells ceased as they had begun, together.  They were
succeeded by a clanking noise, deep down below; as if some person
were dragging a heavy chain over the casks in the wine-merchant's
cellar.  Scrooge then remembered to have heard that ghosts in haunted
houses were described as dragging chains.

The cellar-door flew open with a booming sound, and then he heard the
noise much louder, on the floors below; then coming up the stairs;
then coming straight toward his door.

"It's humbug still!" said Scrooge.  "I won't believe it."

His color changed though, when, without a pause, it came on through
the heavy door, and passed into the room before his eyes.  Upon its
coming in, the dying flame leaped up, as though it cried "I know him!
Marley's Ghost!" and fell again.

The same face; the very same.  Marley in his pigtail, usual
waistcoat, tights, and boots; the tassels on the latter bristling,
like his pigtail, and his coat-skirts, and the hair upon his head.
The chain he drew was clasped about his middle.  It was long, and
wound about him like a tail; and it was made (for Scrooge observed it
closely) of cash-boxes, keys, padlocks, ledgers, deeds, and heavy
purses wrought in steel.  His body was transparent; so that Scrooge,
observing him, and looking through his waistcoat, could see the two
buttons on his coat behind.

Scrooge had often heard it said that Marley had no bowels, but he had
never believed it until now.

No, nor did he believe it even now.  Though he looked the phantom
through and through, and saw it standing before him; though he felt
the chilling influence of its death-cold eyes; and marked the very
texture of the folded kerchief bound about its head and chin, which
wrapper he had not observed before: he was still incredulous, and
fought against his senses.

"How now!" said Scrooge, caustic and cold as ever.  "What do you want
with me?"

"Much!"--Marley's voice, no doubt about it.

"Who are you?"

"Ask me who I _was_."

"Who _were_ you, then?" said Scrooge, raising his voice.  "You're
particular--for a shade."  He was going to say "_to_ a shade," but
substituted this, as more appropriate.

"In life I was your partner, Jacob Marley."

"Can you--can you sit down?" asked Scrooge, looking doubtfully at him.

"I can."

"Do it, then."

Scrooge asked the question, because he didn't know whether a ghost so
transparent might find himself in a condition to take a chair; and
felt that in the event of its being impossible, it might involve the
necessity of an embarrassing explanation.  But the Ghost sat down on
the opposite side of the fireplace, as if he were quite used to it.

"You don't believe in me," observed the Ghost.

"I don't," said Scrooge.

"What evidence would you have of my reality beyond that of your
senses?"

"I don't know," said Scrooge.

"Why do you doubt your senses?"

"Because," said Scrooge, "a little thing affects them.  A slight
disorder of the stomach makes them cheats.  You may be an undigested
bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an
underdone potato.  There's more of gravy than of grave about you,
whatever you are!"

Scrooge was not much in the habit of cracking jokes, nor did he feel,
in his heart, by any means waggish then.  The truth is, that he tried
to be smart, as a means of distracting his own attention, and keeping
down his terror; for the spectre's voice disturbed the very marrow in
his bones.

To sit, staring at those fixed, glazed eyes, in silence for a moment,
would play, Scrooge felt, the very deuce with him.  There was
something very awful, too, in the spectre's being provided with an
infernal atmosphere of its own.  Scrooge could not feel it himself,
but this was clearly the case; for though the Ghost sat perfectly
motionless, its hair, and skirts, and tassels, were still agitated as
by the hot vapor from an oven.

"You see this toothpick?" said Scrooge, returning quickly to the
charge, for the reason just assigned; and wishing, though it were
only for a second, to divert the vision's stony gaze from himself.

"I do," replied the Ghost.

"You are not looking at it," said Scrooge.

"But I see it," said the Ghost, "notwithstanding."

"Well!" returned Scrooge.  "I have but to swallow this, and be for
the rest of my days persecuted by a legion of goblins all of my
creation.  Humbug, I tell you--humbug!"

At this the spirit raised a frightful cry, and shook its chain with
such a dismal and appalling noise, that Scrooge held on tight to his
chair, to save himself from falling in a swoon.  But how much greater
was his horror, when, the phantom taking off the bandage round its
head, as if it were too warm to wear indoors, its lower jaw dropped
down upon its breast!

Scrooge fell upon his knees and clasped his hands before his face.

"Mercy!" he said.  "Dreadful apparition, why do you trouble me?"

"Man of the worldly mind!" replied the Ghost, "do you believe in me
or not?"

"I do," said Scrooge.  "I must.  But why do spirits walk the earth,
and why do they come to me?"

"It is required of every man," the Ghost returned, "that the spirit
within him should walk abroad among his fellow-men, and travel far
and wide; and if that spirit goes not forth in life, it is condemned
to do so after death.  It is doomed to wander through the world--oh,
woe is me!--and witness what it can not share, but might have shared
on earth, and turned to happiness!"

Again the spectre raised a cry, and shook its chain, and wrung its
shadowy hands.

"You are fettered," said Scrooge, trembling.  "Tell me why?"

"I wear the chain I forged in life," replied the Ghost.  "I made it
link by link, and yard by yard; I girded it on of my own free will,
and of my own free will I wore it.  Is its pattern strange to _you_"

Scrooge trembled more and more.

"Or would you know," pursued the Ghost, "the weight and length of the
strong coil you bear yourself?  It was full as heavy, and as long as
this, seven Christmas Eves ago.  You have labored on it, since.  It
is a ponderous chain!"

Scrooge glanced about him on the floor, in the expectation of finding
himself surrounded by some fifty or sixty fathoms of iron cable: but
he could see nothing.

"Jacob," he said imploringly.  "Old Jacob Marley, tell me more.
Speak comfort to me, Jacob."

"I have none to give," the Ghost replied.  "It comes from other
regions, Ebenezer Scrooge, and is conveyed by other ministers, to
other kinds of men.  Nor can I tell you what I would.  A very little
more, is all permitted to me.  I can not rest, I can not stay, I can
not linger anywhere.  My spirit never walked beyond our
counting-house--mark me!--in life my spirit never roved beyond the
narrow limits of our money-changing hole; and weary journeys lie
before me!"

It was a habit with Scrooge, whenever he became thoughtful, to put
his hands in his breeches pockets.  Pondering on what the Ghost had
said, he did so now, but without lifting up his eyes, or getting off
his knees.

"You must have been very slow about it, Jacob," Scrooge observed, in
a business-like manner, though with humility and deference.

"Slow!" the Ghost repeated.

"Seven years dead," mused Scrooge.  "And traveling all the time!"

"The whole time," said the Ghost.  "No rest, no peace.  Incessant
torture of remorse."

"You travel fast?" said Scrooge.

"On the wings of the wind," replied the Ghost.

"You might have got over a great quantity of ground in seven years,"
said Scrooge.

The Ghost, on hearing this, set up another cry, and clanked its chain
so hideously in the dead silence of the night, that the Ward would
have been justified in indicting it for a nuisance.

"Oh! captive, bound, and double-ironed," cried the phantom, "not to
know, that ages of incessant labor, by immortal creatures, for this
earth must pass into eternity before the good of which it is
susceptible is all developed.  Not to know that any Christian spirit
working kindly in its little sphere, whatever it may be, will find
its mortal life too short for its vast means of usefulness.  Not to
know that no space of regret can make amends for one life's
opportunity misused!  Yet such was I!  Oh! such was I!"

"But you were always a good man of business, Jacob," faltered
Scrooge, who now began to apply this to himself.

"Business!" cried the Ghost, wringing his hands again.  "Mankind was
my business.  The common welfare was my business; charity, mercy,
forbearance, and benevolence, were, all, my business.  The dealings
of my trade were but a drop of water in the comprehensive ocean of my
business!"

It held up its chain at arm's-length, as if that were the cause of
all its unavailing grief, and flung it heavily upon the ground again.

"At this time of the rolling year," the spectre said, "I suffer most.
Why did I walk through crowds of fellow-beings with my eyes turned
down, and never raise them to that blessed Star which led the Wise
Men to a poor abode!  Were there no poor homes to which its light
would have conducted _me_!"

Scrooge was very much dismayed to hear the spectre going on at this
rate, and began to quake exceedingly.

"Hear me!" cried the Ghost.  "My time is nearly gone."

"I will," said Scrooge.  "But don't be hard upon me!  Don't be
flowery, Jacob!  Pray!"

"How it is that I appear before you in a shape that you can see, I
may not tell.  I have sat invisible beside you many and many a day."

It was not an agreeable idea.  Scrooge shivered, and wiped the
perspiration from his brow.

"That is no light part of my penance," pursued the Ghost.  "I am here
to-night to warn you that you have yet a chance and hope of escaping
my fate.  A chance and hope of my procuring, Ebenezer."

"You were always a good friend to me," said Scrooge.  "Thank'ee!"

"You will be haunted," resumed the Ghost, "by Three Spirits."

Scrooge's countenance fell almost as low as the Ghost's had done.

"Is that the chance and hope you mentioned, Jacob?" he demanded, in a
faltering voice.

"It is."

"I--I think I'd rather not," said Scrooge.

"Without their visits," said the Ghost, "you can not hope to shun the
path I tread.  Expect the first to-morrow, when the bell tolls one."

"Couldn't I take 'em all at once, and have it over, Jacob?" hinted
Scrooge.

"Expect the second on the next night at the same hour.  The third
upon the next night when the last stroke of twelve has ceased to
vibrate.  Look to see me no more; and look that, for your own sake,
you remember what has passed between us!"

When it had said these words, the spectre took its wrapper from the
table, and bound it round its head, as before.  Scrooge knew this, by
the smart sound its teeth made, when the jaws were brought together
by the bandage.  He ventured to raise his eyes again, and found his
supernatural visitor confronting him in an erect attitude, with its
chain wound over and about its arm.

The apparition walked backward from him; and at every step it took
the window raised itself a little, so that when the spectre reached
it it was wide open.  It beckoned Scrooge to approach, which he did.
When they were within two paces of each other, Marley's Ghost held up
its hand, warning him to come no nearer.  Scrooge stopped.

Not so much in obedience, as in surprise and fear: for on the raising
of the hand, he became sensible of confused noises in the air;
incoherent sounds of lamentation and regret; wailings inexpressibly
sorrowful and self-accusatory.  The spectre, after listening for a
moment, joined in the mournful dirge; and floated out upon the bleak,
dark night.

Scrooge followed to the window, desperate in his curiosity.  He
looked out.

The air was filled with phantoms, wandering hither and thither in
restless haste, and moaning as they went.  Every one of them wore
chains like Marley's Ghost; some few (they might be guilty
governments) were linked together; none were free.  Many had been
personally known to Scrooge in their lives.  He had been quite
familiar with one old ghost, in a white waistcoat, with a monstrous
iron safe attached to its ankle, who cried piteously at being unable
to assist a wretched woman with an infant, whom it saw below, upon a
doorstep.  The misery with them all was, clearly, that they sought to
interfere, for good, in human matters, and had lost the power forever.

Whether these creatures faded into mist, or mist enshrouded them, he
could not tell.  But they and their spirit voices faded together; and
the night became as it had been when he walked home.

Scrooge closed the window, and examined the door by which the Ghost
had entered.  It was double-locked, as he had locked it with his own
hands, and the bolts were undisturbed.  He tried to say "Humbug!" but
stopped at the first syllable.  And being, from the emotion he had
undergone, or the fatigues of the day, or his glimpse of the
Invisible World, or the dull conversation of the Ghost, or the
lateness of the hour, much in need of repose, went straight to bed,
without undressing, and fell asleep upon the instant.



STAVE TWO

_The First of the Three Spirits_

When Scrooge awoke, it was so dark that, looking out of bed, he could
scarcely distinguish the transparent window from the opaque walls of
his chamber.  He was endeavoring to pierce the darkness with his
ferret eyes, when the chimes of a neighboring church struck the four
quarters.  So he listened for the hour.

To his great astonishment the heavy bell went on from six to seven,
and from seven to eight, and regularly up to twelve; then stopped.
Twelve!  It was past two when he went to bed.  The clock was wrong.
An icicle must have got into the works.  Twelve!

He touched the spring of his repeater, to correct this most
preposterous clock.  Its rapid little pulse beat twelve; and stopped.

"Why, it isn't possible," said Scrooge, "that I can have slept
through a whole day and far into another night.  It isn't possible
that anything has happened to the sun, and this is twelve at noon!"

The idea being an alarming one, he scrambled out of bed, and groped
his way to the window.  He was obliged to rub the frost off with the
sleeve of his dressing-gown before he could see anything; and could
see very little then.  All he could make out was that it was still
very foggy and extremely cold, and that there was no noise of people
running to and fro, and making a great stir, as there unquestionably
would have been if night had beaten off bright day, and taken
possession of the world.  This was a great relief, because "three
days after sight of this First of Exchange pay to Mr. Ebenezer
Scrooge or his order," and so forth, would have become a mere United
States security if there were no days to count by.

Scrooge went to bed again, and thought, and thought, and thought it
over and over and over, and could make nothing of it.  The more he
thought, the more perplexed he was; and the more he endeavored not to
think, the more he thought.  Marley's Ghost bothered him exceedingly.
Every time he resolved within himself, after mature inquiry, that it
was all a dream, his mind flew back again, like a strong spring
released, to its first position, and presented the same problem to be
worked all through, "Was it a dream or not?"

Scrooge lay in this state until the chimes had gone three-quarters
more, when he remembered, on a sudden, that the Ghost had warned him
of a visitation when the bell tolled one.  He resolved to lie awake
until the hour was passed; and, considering that he could no more go
to sleep than go to Heaven, this was perhaps the wisest resolution in
his power.

The quarter was so long that he was more than once convinced he must
have sunk into a doze unconsciously, and missed the clock.  At length
it broke upon his listening ear.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter past," said Scrooge, counting.

"Ding, dong!"

"Half-past!" said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"A quarter to it," said Scrooge.

"Ding, dong!"

"The hour itself," said Scrooge, triumphantly, "and nothing else!"

He spoke before the hour bell sounded, which it now did with a deep,
dull, hollow, melancholy One.  Light flashed up in the room upon the
instant, and the curtains of his bed were drawn.

The curtains of his bed were drawn aside, I tell you, by a hand.  Not
the curtains at his feet, nor the curtains at his back, but those to
which his face was addressed.  The curtains of his bed were drawn
aside; and Scrooge, starting up into a half-recumbent attitude, found
himself face to face with the unearthly visitor who drew them: as
close to it as I am now to you, and I am standing in the spirit at
your elbow.

It was a strange figure--like a child: yet not so like a child as
like an old man, viewed through some supernatural medium, which gave
him the appearance of having receded from the view, and being
diminished to a child's proportions.  Its hair, which hung about its
neck and down its back, was white as if with age; and yet the face
had not a wrinkle in it, and the tenderest bloom was on the skin.
The arms were very long and muscular; the hands the same, as if its
hold were of uncommon strength.  Its legs and feet, most delicately
formed, were, like those upper members, bare.  It wore a tunic of the
purest white; and round its waist was bound a lustrous belt, the
sheen of which was beautiful.  It held a branch of fresh green holly
in its hand; and, in singular contradiction of that wintry emblem,
had its dress trimmed with summer flowers.  But the strangest thing
about it was, that from the crown of its head there sprang a bright
clear jet of light, by which all this was visible; and which was
doubtless the occasion of its using, in its duller moments, a great
extinguisher for a cap, which it now held under its arm.

Even this, though, when Scrooge looked at it with increasing
steadiness, was not its strangest quality.  For as its belt sparkled
and glittered now in one part and now in another, and what was light
one instant, at another time was dark, so the figure itself
fluctuated in its distinctness: being now a thing with one arm, now
with one leg, now with twenty legs, now a pair of legs without a
head, now a head without a body: of which dissolving parts, no
outline would be visible in the dense gloom wherein they melted away.
And in the very wonder of this, it would be itself again; distinct
and clear as ever.

"Are you the Spirit, sir, whose coming was foretold to me?" asked
Scrooge.

"I am!"

The voice was soft and gentle.  Singularly low, as if instead of
being so close beside him, it were at a distance.

"Who, and what are you?" Scrooge demanded.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Past."

"Long past?" inquired Scrooge: observant of its dwarfish stature.

"No.  Your Past."

Perhaps, Scrooge could not have told anybody why, if anybody could
have asked him; but he had a special desire to see the Spirit in his
cap; and begged him to be covered.

"What!" exclaimed the Ghost, "would you so soon put out, with worldly
hands, the light I give?  Is it not enough that you are one of those
whose passions made this cap, and force me through whole trains of
years to wear it low upon my brow?"

Scrooge reverently disclaimed all intention to offend, or any
knowledge of having wilfully "bonneted" the Spirit at any period of
his life.  He then made bold to inquire what business brought him
there.

"Your welfare!" said the Ghost.

Scrooge expressed himself much obliged, but could not help thinking
that a night of unbroken rest would have been more conducive to that
end.  The Spirit must have heard him thinking, for it said
immediately:

"Your reclamation, then.  Take heed!"

It put out its strong hand as it spoke, and clasped him gently by the
arm.

"Rise! and walk with me!"

It would have been in vain for Scrooge to plead that the weather and
the hour were not adapted to pedestrian purposes; that the bed was
warm, and the thermometer a long way below freezing; that he was clad
but lightly in his slippers, dressing-gown, and night-cap; and that
he had a cold upon him at that time.  The grasp, though gentle as a
woman's hand, was not to be resisted.  He rose: but finding that the
Spirit made toward the window, clasped its robe in supplication.

"I am a mortal," Scrooge remonstrated, "and liable to fall."

"_Bear_ but a touch of my hand _there_," said the Spirit, laying it
upon his heart, "and you shall be upheld in more than this!"

As the words were spoken, they passed through the wall, and stood
upon an open country road, with fields on either hand.  The city had
entirely vanished.  Not a vestige of it was to be seen.  The darkness
and the mist had vanished with it, for it was a clear, cold, winter
day, with snow upon the ground.

"Good Heaven!" said Scrooge, clasping his hands together, as he
looked about him.  "I was bred in this place.  I was a boy here!"

The Spirit gazed upon him mildly.  Its gentle touch, though it had
been light and instantaneous, appeared still present to the old man's
sense of feeling.  He was conscious of a thousand odors floating in
the air, each one connected with a thousand thoughts and hopes, and
joys, and cares long, long forgotten!

"Your lip is trembling," said the Ghost.  "And what is that upon your
cheek?"

Scrooge muttered, with an unusual catching in his voice, that it was
a pimple; and begged the Ghost to lead him where he would.

"You recollect the way?" inquired the Spirit.

"Remember it!" cried Scrooge with fervor--"I could walk it blindfold."

"Strange to have forgotten it for so many years!" observed the Ghost.
"Let us go on."

They walked along the road: Scrooge recognizing every gate, and post,
and tree; until a little market town appeared in the distance, with
its bridge, its church, and winding river.  Some shaggy ponies now
were seen trotting toward them with boys upon their backs, who called
to other boys in country gigs and carts, driven by farmers.  All
these boys were in great spirits, and shouted to each other, until
the broad fields were so full of merry music that the crisp air
laughed to hear it.

"These are but shadows of the things that have been," said the Ghost.
"They have no consciousness of us."

The jocund travelers came on; and as they came, Scrooge knew and
named them every one.  Why was he rejoiced beyond all bounds to see
them!  Why did his cold eye glisten, and his heart leap up as they
went past!  Why was he filled with gladness when he heard them give
each other Merry Christmas, as they parted at cross-roads and
by-ways, for their several homes!  What was merry Christmas to
Scrooge?  Out upon merry Christmas!  What good had it ever done to
him?

"The school is not quite deserted," said the Ghost.  "A solitary
child, neglected by his friends, is left there still."

Scrooge said he knew it.  And he sobbed.

They left the highroad, by a well-remembered lane, and soon
approached a mansion of dull red brick, with a little weathercock
surmounted cupola, on the roof, and a bell hanging in it.  It was a
large house, but one of broken fortunes; for the spacious offices
were little used, their walls were damp and mossy, their windows
broken, and their gates decayed.  Fowls clucked and strutted in the
stables; and the coach-houses and sheds were overrun with grass.  Nor
was it more retentive of its ancient state, within; for entering the
dreary hall, and glancing through the open doors of many rooms, they
found them poorly furnished, cold, and vast.  There was an earthy
savor in the air, a chilly bareness in the place, which associated
itself somehow with too much getting up by candle-light, and not too
much to eat.

They went, the Ghost and Scrooge, across the hall, to a door at the
back of the house.  It opened before them, and disclosed a long,
bare, melancholy room, made barer still by lines of plain deal forms
and desks.  At one of these a lonely boy was reading near a feeble
fire; and Scrooge sat down upon a form, and wept to see his poor
forgotten self as he had used to be.

Not a latent echo in the house, not a squeak and scuffle from the
mice behind the paneling, not a drip from the half-thawed water-spout
in the dull yard behind, not a sigh among the leafless boughs of one
despondent poplar, not the idle swinging of an empty storehouse door,
no, not a clicking in the fire, but fell upon the heart of Scrooge
with softening influence, and gave a freer passage to his tears.

The Spirit touched him on the arm, and pointed to his younger self,
intent upon his reading.  Suddenly a man, in foreign garments:
wonderfully real and distinct to look at: stood outside the window,
with an axe stuck in his belt, and leading an ass laden with wood by
the bridle.

"Why, it's Ali Baba!" Scrooge exclaimed in ecstasy.  "It's dear old
honest Ali Baba!  Yes, yes, I know!  One Christmas time, when yonder
solitary child was left here all alone, he _did_ come, for the first
time, just like that.  Poor boy!  And Valentine," said Scrooge, "and
his wild brother, Orson; there they go!  And what's his name, who was
put down in his drawers, asleep, at the Gate of Damascus; don't you
see him!  And the Sultan's Groom turned upside down by the Genii;
there he is upon his head!  Serve him right.  I'm glad of it.  What
business had he to be married to the Princess!"

To hear Scrooge expending all the earnestness of his nature on such
subjects, in a most extraordinary voice between laughing and crying;
and to see his heightened and excited face; would have been a
surprise to his business friends in the City, indeed.

"There's the Parrot!" cried Scrooge.  "Green body and yellow tail,
with a thing like a lettuce growing out of the top of his head; there
he is!  Poor Robin Crusoe, he called him, when he came home again
after sailing round the island.  'Poor Robin Crusoe, where have you
been, Robin Crusoe?'  The man thought he was dreaming, but he wasn't.
It was the Parrot, you know.  There goes Friday, running for his life
to the little creek!  Halloa!  Hoop!  Halloo!"

Then, with a rapidity of transition very foreign to his usual
character, he said, in pity for his former self, "Poor boy!" and
cried again.

"I wish," Scrooge muttered, putting his hand in his pocket, and
looking about him, after drying his eyes with his cuff: "but it's too
late now."

"What is the matter?" asked the Spirit.

"Nothing," said Scrooge.  "Nothing.  There was a boy singing a
Christmas Carol at my door last night.  I should like to have given
him something: that's all."

The Ghost smiled thoughtfully, and waved its hand: saying as it did
so, "Let us see another Christmas!"

Scrooge's former self grew larger at the words, and the room became a
little darker and more dirty.  The panels shrank, the windows
cracked; fragments of plaster fell out of the ceiling, and the naked
laths were shown instead; but how all this was brought about Scrooge
knew no more than you do.  He only knew that it was quite correct;
that everything had happened so; that there he was, alone again, when
all the other boys had gone home for the jolly holidays.

He was not reading now, but walking up and down despairingly.
Scrooge looked at the Ghost, and with a mournful shaking of his head
glanced anxiously toward the door.

It opened; and a little girl, much younger than the boy, came darting
in, and putting her arms about his neck, and often kissing him,
addressed him as her "Dear, dear brother."

"I have come to bring you home, dear brother!" said the child,
clapping her tiny hands, and bending down to laugh.  "To bring you
home, home, home!"

"Home, little Fan?" returned the boy.

"Yes!" said the child, brimful of glee.  "Home, for good and all.
Home, forever and ever.  Father is so much kinder than he used to be
that home's like Heaven!  He spoke so gently to me one dear night
when I was going to bed, that I was not afraid to ask him once more
if you might come home; and he said Yes, you should; and sent me in a
coach to bring you.  And you're to be a man!" said the child, opening
her eyes, "and are never to come back here; but first we're to be
together all the Christmas long, and have the merriest time in all
the world."

"You are quite a woman, little Fan!" exclaimed the boy.  She clapped
her hands and laughed, and tried to touch his head; but being too
little, laughed again, and stood on tiptoe to embrace him.  Then she
began to drag him, in her childish eagerness, toward the door; and
he, nothing loth to go, accompanied her.

A terrible voice in the hall cried, "Bring down Master Scrooge's box,
there!" and in the hall appeared the schoolmaster himself, who glared
on Master Scrooge with a ferocious condescension, and threw him into
a dreadful state of mind by shaking hands with him.  He then conveyed
him and his sister into the veriest old well of a shivering
best-parlor that ever was seen, where the maps upon the wall, and the
celestial and terrestrial globes in the windows, were waxy with cold.
Here he produced a decanter of curiously light wine, and a block of
curiously heavy cake, and administered instalments of those dainties
to the young people; at the same time sending out a meagre servant to
offer a glass of "something" to the postboy, who answered that he
thanked the gentleman, but if it was the same tap as he had tasted
before, he had rather not.  Master Scrooge's trunk being by this time
tied on to the top of the chaise, the children bade the schoolmaster
good-by right willingly; and getting into it, drove gaily down the
garden-sweep, the quick wheels dashing the hoar-frost and snow from
off the dark leaves of the evergreens like spray.

"Always a delicate creature, whom a breath might have withered," said
the Ghost.  "But she had a large heart!"

"So she had," cried Scrooge.  "You're right.  I'll not gainsay it,
Spirit.  God forbid!"

"She died a woman," said the Ghost, "and had, as I think, children."

"One child," Scrooge returned.

"True," said the Ghost.  "Your nephew!"

Scrooge seemed uneasy in his mind; and answered briefly, "Yes."

Although they had but that moment left the school behind them, they
were now in the busy thoroughfares of a city, where shadowy
passengers passed and repassed; where shadowy carts and coaches
battled for the way, and all the strife and tumult of a real city
were.  It was made plain enough, by the dressing of the shops, that
here too it was Christmas time again; but it was evening, and the
streets were lighted up.

The Ghost stopped at a certain warehouse door, and asked Scrooge if
he knew it.

"Know it!" said Scrooge.  "I was apprenticed here!"

They went in.  At sight of an old gentleman in a Welsh wig, sitting
behind such a high desk, that if he had been two inches taller he
must have knocked his head against the ceiling, Scrooge cried in
great excitement:

"Why, it's old Fezziwig!  Bless his heart; it's Fezziwig alive again!"

Old Fezziwig laid down his pen, and looked up at the clock, which
pointed to the hour of seven.  He rubbed his hands; adjusted his
capacious waistcoat; laughed all over himself, from his shoes to his
organ of benevolence; and called out in a comfortable, oily, rich,
fat, jovial voice:

"Yo ho, there!  Ebenezer!  Dick!"

Scrooge's former self, now grown a young man, came briskly in,
accompanied by his fellow-'prentice.

"Dick Wilkins, to be sure!" said Scrooge to the Ghost.  "Bless me,
yes.  There he is.  He was very much attached to me, was Dick.  Poor
Dick!  Dear, dear!"

"Yo ho, my boys!" said Fezziwig.  "No more work to-night.  Christmas
Eve, Dick.  Christmas, Ebenezer!  Let's have the shutters up," cried
old Fezziwig, with a sharp clap of his hands, "before a man can say
Jack Robinson!"

You wouldn't believe how those two fellows went at it!  They charged
into the street with the shutters--one, two, three--had 'em up in
their places--four, five, six--barred 'em and pinned 'em--seven,
eight, nine--and came back before you could have got to twelve,
panting like racehorses.

"Hilli-ho!" cried old Fezziwig, skipping down from the high desk with
wonderful agility.  "Clear away, my lads, and let's have lots of room
here!  Hilli-ho, Dick!  Chirrup, Ebenezer!"

Clear away!  There was nothing they wouldn't have cleared away, or
couldn't have cleared away, with old Fezziwig looking on.  It was
done in a minute.  Every movable was packed off, as if it were
dismissed from public life for evermore; the floor was swept and
watered, the lamps were trimmed, fuel was heaped upon the fire; and
the warehouse was as snug, and warm, and dry, and bright a ballroom
as you would desire to see upon a winter's night.

In came a fiddler with a music-book, and went up to the lofty desk,
and made an orchestra of it, and tuned like fifty stomach-aches.  In
came Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile.  In came the three
Miss Fezziwigs, beaming and lovable.  In came the six young followers
whose hearts they broke.  In came all the young men and women
employed in the business.  In came the housemaid, with her cousin,
the baker.  In came the cook, with her brother's particular friend,
the milkman.  In came the boy from over the way, who was suspected of
not having board enough from his master; trying to hide himself
behind the girl from next door but one, who was proved to have had
her ears pulled by her mistress.  In they all came, one after
another; some shyly, some boldly, some gracefully, some awkwardly,
some pushing, some pulling; in they all came, anyhow and everyhow.
Away they all went, twenty couple at once, hands half round and back
again the other way; down the middle and up again; round and round in
various stages of affectionate grouping; old top couple always
turning up in the wrong place; new top couple starting off again, as
soon as they got there; all top couples at last, and not a bottom one
to help them.  When this result was brought about, old Fezziwig,
clapping his hands to stop the dance, cried out, "Well done!" and the
fiddler plunged his hot face into a pot of porter, especially
provided for that purpose.  But scorning rest upon his reappearance,
he instantly began again, though there were no dancers yet, as if the
other fiddler had been carried home, exhausted, on a shutter; and he
were a bran-new man resolved to beat him out of sight, or perish.

There were more dances, and there were forfeits, and more dances, and
there was cake, and there was negus, and there was a great piece of
Cold Roast, and there was a great piece of Cold Boiled, and there
were mince-pies, and plenty of beer.  But the great effect of the
evening came after the Roast and Boiled when the fiddler (an artful
dog, mind!  The sort of man who knew his business better than you or
I could have told it him!) struck up "Sir Roger de Coverley."  Then
old Fezziwig stood out to dance with Mrs. Fezziwig.  Top couple, too;
with a good stiff piece of work cut out for them; three or four and
twenty pair of partners; people who were not to be trifled with;
people who would dance, and had no notion of walking.

But if they had been twice as many: ah, four times: old Fezziwig
would have been a match for them, and so would Mrs. Fezziwig.  As to
_her_, she was worthy to be his partner in every sense of the term.
If that's not high praise, tell me higher, and I'll use it.  A
positive light appeared to issue from Fezziwig's calves.  They shone
in every part of the dance like moons.  You couldn't have predicted,
at any given time, what would become of 'em next.  And when old
Fezziwig and Mrs. Fezziwig had gone all through the dance; advance
and retire, hold hands with your partner; bow and courtesy;
cork-screw; thread-the-needle, and back again to your place; Fezziwig
"cut"--cut so deftly, that he appeared to wink with his legs, and
came upon his feet again without a stagger.

When the clock struck eleven, this domestic ball broke up.  Mr. and
Mrs. Fezziwig took their stations, one on either side the door, and
shaking hands with every person individually as he or she went out,
wished him or her a Merry Christmas.  When everybody had retired but
the two 'prentices, they did the same to them; and thus the cheerful
voices died away, and the lads were left to their beds; which were
under a counter in the back-shop.

During the whole of this time, Scrooge had acted like a man out of
his wits.  His heart and soul were in the scene, and with his former
self.  He corroborated everything, remembered everything, enjoyed
everything, and underwent the strangest agitation.  It was not until
now, when the bright faces of his former self and Dick were turned
from them, that he remembered the Ghost, and became conscious that it
was looking full upon him, while the light upon its head burned very
clear.

"A small matter," said the Ghost, "to make these silly folks so full
of gratitude."

"Small!" echoed Scrooge.

The Spirit signed to him to listen to the two apprentices, who were
pouring out their hearts in praise of Fezziwig: and when he had done
so, said:

"Why!  Is it not?  He has spent but a few pounds of your mortal
money: three or four, perhaps.  Is that so much that he deserves this
praise?"

"It isn't that," said Scrooge, heated by the remark, and speaking
unconsciously like his former, not his latter, self.  "It isn't that,
Spirit.  He has the power to render us happy or unhappy; to make our
service light or burdensome; a pleasure or a toil.  Say that his
power lies in words and looks; in things so slight and insignificant
that it is impossible to add and count 'em up: what then?  The
happiness he gives is quite as great as if it cost a fortune."

He felt the Spirit's glance, and stopped.

"What is the matter?" asked the Ghost.

"Nothing particular," said Scrooge.

"Something, I think?" the Ghost insisted.

"No," said Scrooge, "no.  I should like to be able to say a word or
two to my clerk just now!  That's all."

His former self turned down the lamps as he gave utterance to the
wish; and Scrooge and the Ghost again stood side by side in the open
air.

"My time grows short," observed the Spirit.  "Quick!"

This was not addressed to Scrooge, or to any one whom he could see,
but it produced an immediate effect.  For again Scrooge saw himself.
He was older now; a man in the prime of life.  His face had not the
harsh and rigid lines of later years; but it had begun to wear the
signs of care and avarice.  There was an eager, greedy, restless
motion in the eye, which showed the passion that had taken root, and
where the shadow of the growing tree would fall.

He was not alone, but sat by the side of a fair young girl in a
mourning-dress: in whose eyes there were tears, which sparkled in the
light that shone out of the Ghost of Christmas Past.

"It matters little," she said, softly.  "To you, very little.
Another idol has displaced me; and if it can cheer and comfort you in
time to come, as I would have tried to do, I have no just cause to
grieve."

"What Idol has displaced you?" he rejoined.

"A golden one."

"This is the even-handed dealing of the world!" he said.  "There is
nothing on which it is so hard as poverty; and there is nothing it
professes to condemn with such severity as the pursuit of wealth!"

"You fear the world too much," she answered, gently.  "All your other
hopes have merged into the hope of being beyond the chance of its
sordid reproach.  I have seen your nobler aspirations fall off one by
one, until the master-passion, Gain, engrosses you.  Have I not?"

"What then?" he retorted.  "Even if I have grown so much wiser, what
then?  I am not changed toward you."

She shook her head.

"Am I?"

"Our contract is an old one.  It was made when we were both poor and
content to be so, until, in good season, we could improve our worldly
fortune by our patient industry.  You _are_ changed.  When it was
made, you were another man."

"I was a boy," he said impatiently.

"Your own feeling tells you that you were not what you are," she
returned.  "I am.  That which promised happiness when we were one in
heart, is fraught with misery now that we are two.  How often and how
keenly I have thought of this, I will not say.  It is enough that I
_have_ thought of it, and can release you."

"Have I ever sought release?"

"In words?  No.  Never."

"In what, then?"

"In a changed nature; in an altered spirit; in another atmosphere of
life; another Hope as its great end.  In everything that made my love
of any worth or value in your sight.  If this had never been between
us," said the girl, looking mildly, but with steadiness, upon him,
"tell me, would you seek me out and try to win me now?  Ah, no!"

He seemed to yield to the justice of this supposition, in spite of
himself.  But he said with a struggle, "You think not."

"I would gladly think otherwise if I could," she answered, "Heaven
knows!  When _I_ have learned a Truth like this, I know how strong
and irresistible it must be.  But if you were free to-day, to-morrow,
yesterday, can even I believe that you would choose a dowerless
girl--you who, in your very confidence with her, weigh everything by
Gain: or, choosing her, if for a moment you were false enough to your
one guiding principle to do so, do I not know that your repentance
and regret would surely follow?  I do; and I release you.  With a
full heart, for the love of him you once were."

He was about to speak; but with her head turned from him, she resumed.

"You may--the memory of what is past half makes me hope you
will--have pain in this.  A very, very brief time, and you will
dismiss the recollection of it, gladly, as an unprofitable dream,
from which it happened well that you awoke.  May you be happy in the
life you have chosen!"

She left him, and they parted.

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, "show me no more!  Conduct me home.  Why do
you delight to torture me?"

"One shadow more!" exclaimed the Ghost.

"No more!" cried Scrooge.  "No more.  I don't wish to see it.  Show
me no more!"

But the relentless Ghost pinioned him in both his arms, and forced
him to observe what happened next.

They were in another scene and place; a room not very large or
handsome, but full of comfort.  Near to the winter fire sat a
beautiful young girl, so like the last that Scrooge believed it was
the same, until he saw her, now a comely matron, sitting opposite her
daughter.  The noise in this room was perfectly tumultuous, for there
were more children there than Scrooge in his agitated state of mind
could count; and, unlike the celebrated herd in the poem, they were
not forty children conducting themselves like one, but every child
was conducting itself like forty.  The consequences were uproarious
beyond belief; but no one seemed to care; on the contrary, the mother
and daughter laughed heartily, and enjoyed it very much; and the
latter, soon beginning to mingle in the sports, got pillaged by the
young brigands most ruthlessly.  What would I not have given to be
one of them!  Though I never could have been so rude, no, no!  I
wouldn't for the wealth of all the world have crushed that braided
hair, and torn it down; and for the precious little shoe, I wouldn't
have plucked it off, God bless my soul! to save my life.  As to
measuring her waist in sport, as they did, bold young brood, I
couldn't have done it; I should have expected my arm to have grown
round it for a punishment, and never come straight again.  And yet I
should have dearly liked, I own, to have touched her lips; to have
questioned her, that she might have opened them; to have looked upon
the lashes of her downcast eyes, and never raised a blush; to have
let loose waves of hair, an inch of which would be a keepsake beyond
price: in short, I should have liked, I do confess, to have had the
lightest license of a child, and yet been man enough to know its
value.

But now a knocking at the door was heard, and such a rush immediately
ensued that she with laughing face and plundered dress was borne
toward it the centre of a flushed and boisterous group, just in time
to greet the father, who came home attended by a man laden with
Christmas toys and presents.  Then the shouting and the struggling,
and the onslaught that was made on the defenseless porter!  The
scaling him with chairs for ladders to dive into his pockets, despoil
him of brown-paper parcels, hold on tight by his cravat, hug him
round the neck, pommel his back, and kick his legs in irrepressible
affection!  The shouts of wonder and delight with which the
development of every package was received!  The terrible announcement
that the baby had been taken in the act of putting a doll's
frying-pan into his mouth, and was more than suspected of having
swallowed a fictitious turkey, glued on a wooden platter!  The
immense relief of finding this a false alarm!  The joy, and
gratitude, and ecstasy!  They are all indescribable alike.  It is
enough that by degrees the children and their emotions got out of the
parlor and by one stair at a time, up to the top of the house; where
they went to bed, and so subsided.

And now Scrooge looked on more attentively than ever, when the master
of the house, having his daughter leaning fondly on him, sat down
with her and her mother at his own fireside; and when he thought that
such another creature, quite as graceful and as full of promise,
might have called him father, and been a spring-time in the haggard
winter of his life, his sight grew very dim indeed.

"Belle," said the husband, turning to his wife with a smile, "I saw
an old friend of yours this afternoon."

"Who was it?"

"Guess!"

"How can I?  Tut, don't I know?" she added in the same breath,
laughing as he laughed.  "Mr. Scrooge."

"Mr. Scrooge it was.  I passed his office window; and as it was not
shut up, and he had a candle inside, I could scarcely help seeing
him.  His partner lies upon the point of death, I hear; and there he
sat alone.  Quite alone in the world, I do believe."

"Spirit!" said Scrooge in a broken voice, "remove me from this place."

"I told you these were shadows of the things that have been," said
the Ghost.  "That they are what they are, do not blame me!"

"Remove me!" Scrooge exclaimed, "I can not bear it!"

He turned upon the Ghost, and seeing that it looked upon him with a
face, in which in some strange way there were fragments of all the
faces it had shown him, wrestled with it.

"Leave me!  Take me back.  Haunt me no longer!"

In the struggle, if that can be called a struggle in which the Ghost
with no visible resistance on its own part was undisturbed by any
effort of its adversary, Scrooge observed that its light was burning
high and bright; and dimly connecting that with its influence over
him, he seized the extinguisher-cap, and by a sudden action pressed
it down upon its head.

The Spirit dropped beneath it, so that the extinguisher covered its
whole form; but though Scrooge pressed it down with all his force, he
could not hide the light, which streamed from under it, in an
unbroken flood upon the ground.

He was conscious of being exhausted, and overcome by an irresistible
drowsiness; and, further, of being in his own bedroom.  He gave the
cap a parting squeeze, in which his hand relaxed; and had barely time
to reel to bed, before he sank into a heavy sleep.



STAVE THREE

_The Second of the Three Spirits_

Awakening in the middle of a prodigiously tough snore and sitting up
in bed to get his thoughts together, Scrooge had no occasion to be
told that the bell was again upon the stroke of One.  He felt that he
was restored to consciousness in the right nick of time, for the
especial purpose of holding a conference with the second messenger
despatched to him through Jacob Marley's intervention.  But, finding
that he turned uncomfortably cold when he began to wonder which of
his curtains this new spectre would draw back, he put them every one
aside with his own hands, and lying down again, established a sharp
look-out all round the bed.  For he wished to challenge the Spirit on
the moment of its appearance, and did not wish to be taken by
surprise and made nervous.

Gentlemen of the free-and-easy sort, who plume themselves on being
acquainted with a move or two, and being usually equal to the
time-of-day, express the wide range of their capacity for adventure
by observing that they are good for anything from pitch-and-toss to
manslaughter; between which opposite extremes, no doubt, there lies a
tolerably wide and comprehensive range of subjects.  Without
venturing for Scrooge quite as hardily as this, I don't mind calling
on you to believe that he was ready for a good broad field of strange
appearances, and that nothing between a baby and a rhinoceros would
have astonished him very much.

Now, being prepared for almost anything, he was not by any means
prepared for nothing; and, consequently, when the Bell struck One,
and no shape appeared, he was taken with a violent fit of trembling.
Five minutes, ten minutes, a quarter of an hour went by, yet nothing
came.  All this time he lay upon his bed, the very core and centre of
a blaze of ruddy light, which streamed upon it when the clock
proclaimed the hour; and which, being only light, was more alarming
than a dozen ghosts, as he was powerless to make out what it meant,
or would be at; and was sometimes apprehensive that he might be at
that very moment an interesting case of spontaneous combustion,
without having the consolation of knowing it.  At last, however, he
began to think--as you or I would have thought at first; for it is
always the person not in the predicament who knows what ought to have
been done in it, and would unquestionably have done it too--at last,
I say, he began to think that the source and secret of this ghostly
light might be in the adjoining room, from whence, on further tracing
it, it seemed to shine.  This idea taking full possession of his
mind, he got up softly and shuffled in his slippers to the door.

The moment Scrooge's hand was on the lock, a strange voice called him
by his name, and bade him enter.  He obeyed.

It was his own room.  There was no doubt about that.  But it had
undergone a surprising transformation.  The walls and ceiling were so
hung with living green, that it looked a perfect grove, from every
part of which bright gleaming berries glistened.  The crisp leaves of
holly, mistletoe, and ivy reflected back the light, as if so many
little mirrors had been scattered there; and such a mighty blaze went
roaring up the chimney as that dull petrifaction of a hearth had
never known in Scrooge's time, or Marley's, or for many and many a
winter season gone.  Heaped up on the floor, to form a kind of
throne, were turkeys, geese, game, poultry, brawn, great joints of
meat, sucking-pigs, long wreaths of sausages, mince-pies,
plum-puddings, barrels of oysters, red-hot chestnuts, cherry-cheeked
apples, juicy oranges, luscious pears, immense twelfth-cakes, and
seething bowls of punch, that made the chamber dim with their
delicious steam.  In easy state upon this couch, there sat a jolly
Giant, glorious to see; who bore a glowing torch, in shape not unlike
Plenty's horn, and held it up, high up, to shed its light on Scrooge,
as he came peeping round the door.

"Come in!" exclaimed the Ghost.  "Come in! and know me better, man!"

Scrooge entered timidly, and hung his head before this Spirit.  He
was not the dogged Scrooge he had been; and though the Spirit's eyes
were clear and kind, he did not like to meet them.

"I am the Ghost of Christmas Present," said the Spirit.  "Look upon
me!"

Scrooge reverently did so.  It was clothed in one simple deep-green
robe, or mantle, bordered with white fur.  This garment hung so
loosely on the figure, that its capacious breast was bare, as if
disdaining to be warded or concealed by any artifice.  Its feet,
observable beneath the ample folds of the garment, were also bare;
and on its head it wore no other covering than a holly wreath set
here and there with shining icicles.  Its dark-brown curls were long
and free; free as its genial face, its sparkling eye, its open hand,
its cheery voice, its unconstrained demeanor, and its joyful air.
Girdled round its middle was an antique scabbard; but no sword was in
it, and the ancient sheath was eaten up with rust.

"You have never seen the like of me before!" exclaimed the Spirit.

"Never," Scrooge made answer to it.

"Have never walked forth with the younger members of my family;
meaning (for I am very young) my elder brothers born in these later
years?" pursued the Phantom.

"I don't think I have," said Scrooge.  "I am afraid I have not.  Have
you had many brothers, Spirit?"

"More than eighteen hundred," said the Ghost.

"A tremendous family to provide for!" muttered Scrooge.

The Ghost of Christmas Present rose.

"Spirit," said Scrooge submissively, "conduct me where you will.  I
went forth last night on compulsion, and I learned a lesson which is
working now.  To-night, if you have aught to teach me, let me profit
by it."

"Touch my robe!"

Scrooge did as he was told, and held it fast.

Holly, mistletoe, red berries, ivy, turkeys, geese, game, poultry,
brawn, meat, pigs, sausages, oysters, pies, puddings, fruit, and
punch, all vanished instantly.  So did the room, the fire, the ruddy
glow, the hour of night, and they stood in the City streets on
Christmas morning, where (for the weather was severe) the people made
a rough but brisk and not unpleasant kind of music, in scraping the
snow from the pavement in front of their dwellings, and from the tops
of their houses: whence it was mad delight to the boys to see it come
plumping down into the road below, and splitting into artificial
little snowstorms.

The house fronts looked black enough, and the windows blacker,
contrasting with the smooth white sheet of snow upon the roofs, and
with the dirtier snow upon the ground; which last deposit had been
plowed up in deep furrows by the heavy wheels of carts and wagons;
furrows that crossed and recrossed each other hundreds of times where
the great streets branched off, and made intricate channels, hard to
trace, in the thick yellow mud and icy water.  The sky was gloomy,
and the shortest streets were choked up with a dingy mist, half
thawed, half frozen, whose heavier particles descended in a shower of
sooty atoms, as if all the chimneys in Great Britain had, by one
consent, caught fire, and were blazing away to their dear hearts'
content.  There was nothing very cheerful in the climate or the town,
and yet was there an air of cheerfulness abroad that the clearest
summer air and brightest summer sun might have endeavored to diffuse
in vain.

For the people who were shoveling away on the housetops were jovial
and full of glee; calling out to one another from the parapets, and
now and then exchanging a facetious snowball--better-natured missile
far than many a wordy jest--laughing heartily if it went right and
not less heartily if it went wrong.  The poulterers' shops were still
half open, and the fruiterers were radiant in their glory.  There
were great, round, pot-bellied baskets of chestnuts, shaped like the
waistcoats of jolly old gentlemen, lolling at the doors, and tumbling
out into the street in their apoplectic opulence.  There were ruddy,
brown-faced, broad-girthed Spanish Onions, shining in the fatness of
their growth like Spanish Friars; and winking from their shelves in
wanton slyness at the girls as they went by and glanced demurely at
the hung-up mistletoe.  There were pears and apples, clustered high
in blooming pyramids; there were bunches of grapes, made, in the
shopkeepers' benevolence, to dangle from conspicuous hooks, that
people's mouths might water gratis as they passed; there were piles
of filberts, mossy and brown, recalling, in their fragrance, ancient
walks among the woods, and pleasant shufflings ankle-deep through
withered leaves; there were Norfolk Biffins, squab and swarthy,
setting off the yellow of the oranges and lemons, and, in the great
compactness of their juicy persons, urgently entreating and
beseeching to be carried home in paper bags and eaten after dinner.
The very gold and silver fish, set forth among these choice fruits in
a bowl, though members of a dull and stagnant-blooded race, appeared
to know that there was something going on; and, to a fish, went
gasping round and round their little world in slow and passionless
excitement.

The Grocers'! oh the Grocers'! nearly closed, with perhaps two
shutters down, or one; but through those gaps such glimpses!  It was
not alone that the scales descending on the counter made a merry
sound, or that the twine and roller parted company so briskly, or
that the canisters were rattled up and down like juggling tricks, or
even that the blended scents of tea and coffee were so grateful to
the nose, or even that the raisins were so plentiful and rare, the
almonds so extremely white, the sticks of cinnamon so long and
straight, the other spices so delicious, the candied fruits so caked
and spotted with molten sugar as to make the coldest lookers-on feel
faint and subsequently bilious.  Nor was it that the figs were moist
and pulpy, or that the French plums blushed in modest tartness from
their highly decorated boxes, or that everything was good to eat and
in its Christmas dress: but the customers were all so hurried and so
eager in the hopeful promise of the day, that they tumbled up against
each other at the door, clashing their wicker baskets wildly, and
left their purchases upon the counter, and came running back to fetch
them, and committed hundreds of the like mistakes in the best humor
possible; while the Grocer and his people were so frank and fresh
that the polished hearts with which they fastened their aprons behind
might have been their own, worn outside for general inspection, and
for Christmas daws to peck at if they chose.

But soon the steeples called good people all to church and chapel,
and away they came, flocking through the streets in their best
clothes, and with their gayest faces.  And at the same time there
emerged from scores of by-streets, lanes, and nameless turnings,
innumerable people, carrying their dinners to the bakers' shops.  The
sight of these poor revelers appeared to interest the Spirit very
much, for he stood with Scrooge beside him in a baker's doorway, and
taking off the covers as their bearers passed, sprinkled incense on
their dinners from his torch.  And it was a very uncommon kind of
torch, for once or twice when there were angry words between some
dinner-carriers who had jostled with each other, he shed a few drops
of water on them from it, and their good humor was restored directly.
For they said it was a shame to quarrel upon Christmas Day.  And so
it was!  God love it, so it was!

In time the bells ceased, and the bakers were shut up; and yet there
was a genial shadowing forth of all these dinners and the progress of
their cooking, in the thawed blotch of wet above each baker's oven;
where the pavement smoked as if its stones were cooking too.

"Is there a peculiar flavor in what you sprinkle from your torch?"
asked Scrooge.

"There is.  My own."

"Would it apply to any kind of dinner on this day?" asked Scrooge.

"To any kindly given.  To a poor one most."

"Why to a poor one most?" asked Scrooge.

"Because it needs it most."

"Spirit," said Scrooge, after a moment's thought, "I wonder you, of
all the beings in the many worlds about us, should desire to cramp
these people's opportunities of innocent enjoyment."

"I!" cried the Spirit.

"You would deprive them of their means of dinner every seventh day,
often the only day on which they can be said to dine at all," said
Scrooge.  "Wouldn't you?"

"I!" cried the Spirit.

"You seek to close these places on the Seventh Day!" said Scrooge.
"And it comes to the same thing."

"_I_ seek!" exclaimed the Spirit.

"Forgive me if I am wrong.  It has been done in your name, or at
least in that of your family," said Scrooge.

"There are some upon this earth of yours," returned the Spirit, "who
lay claim to know us, and who do their deeds of passion, pride,
ill-will, hatred, envy, bigotry, and selfishness in our name, who are
as strange to us and all our kith and kin, as if they had never
lived.  Remember that, and charge their doings on themselves, not us."

Scrooge promised that he would; and they went on, invisible, as they
had been before, into the suburbs of the town.  It was a remarkable
quality of the Ghost (which Scrooge had observed at the baker's),
that notwithstanding his gigantic size, he could accommodate himself
to any place with ease; and that he stood beneath a low roof quite as
gracefully and like a supernatural creature as it was possible he
could have done in any lofty hall.

And perhaps it was the pleasure the good Spirit had in showing off
this power of his, or else it was his own kind, generous, hearty
nature, and his sympathy with all poor men, that led him straight to
Scrooge's clerk's; for there he went, and took Scrooge with him,
holding to his robe; and on the threshold of the door the Spirit
smiled, and stopped to bless Bob Cratchit's dwelling with the
sprinklings of his torch.  Think of that!  Bob had but fifteen "Bob"
a week himself; he pocketed on Saturdays but fifteen copies of his
Christian name; and yet the Ghost of Christmas Present blessed his
four-roomed house!

Then up rose Mrs. Cratchit, Cratchit's wife, dressed out but poorly
in a twice-turned gown, but brave in ribbons, which are cheap and
make a goodly show for sixpence; and she laid the cloth, assisted by
Belinda Cratchit, second of her daughters, also brave in ribbons;
while Master Peter Cratchit plunged a fork into the saucepan of
potatoes, and getting the corners of his monstrous shirt collar
(Bob's private property, conferred upon his son and heir in honor of
the day) into his mouth, rejoiced to find himself so gallantly
attired, and yearned to show his linen in the fashionable Parks.  And
now two smaller Cratchits, boy and girl, came tearing in, screaming
that outside the baker's they had smelled the goose, and known it for
their own; and basking in luxurious thoughts of sage-and-onion, these
young Cratchits danced about the table, and exalted Master Peter
Cratchit to the skies, while he (not proud, although his collars
nearly choked him) blew the fire, until the slow potatoes, bubbling
up, knocked loudly at the saucepan-lid to be let out and peeled.

"What has ever got your precious father, then?" said Mrs. Cratchit.
"And your brother, Tiny Tim!  And Martha warn't as late last
Christmas Day by half-an-hour!"

"Here's Martha, mother!" said a girl, appearing as she spoke.

"Here's Martha, mother!" cried the two young Cratchits.  "Hurrah!
There's _such_ a goose, Martha!"

"Why, bless your heart alive, my dear, how late you are!" said Mrs.
Cratchit, kissing her a dozen times, and taking off her shawl and
bonnet for her with officious zeal.

"We'd a deal of work to finish up last night," replied the girl, "and
had to clear away this morning, mother!"

"Well!  Never mind so long as you are come," said Mrs. Cratchit.
"Sit ye down before the fire, my dear, and have a warm, Lord bless
ye!"

"No, no!  There's father coming," cried the two young Cratchits, who
were everywhere at once.  "Hide, Martha, hide!"

So Martha hid herself, and in came little Bob, the father, with at
least three feet of comforter, exclusive of the fringe, hanging down
before him; and his threadbare clothes darned up and brushed, to look
seasonable; and Tiny Tim upon his shoulder.  Alas for Tiny Tim, he
bore a little crutch, and had his limbs supported by an iron frame!

"Why, where's our Martha?" cried Bob Cratchit, looking round.

"Not coming," said Mrs. Cratchit.

"Not coming!" said Bob, with a sudden declension in his high spirits;
for he had been Tim's blood horse all the way from church, and had
come home rampant.  "Not coming upon Christmas Day!"

Martha didn't like to see him disappointed, if it were only in joke;
so she came out prematurely from behind the closet door, and ran into
his arms, while the two young Cratchits hustled Tiny Tim, and bore
him off into the wash-house, that he might hear the pudding singing
in the copper.

"And how did little Tim behave?" asked Mrs. Cratchit, when she had
rallied Bob on his credulity, and Bob had hugged his daughter to his
heart's content.

"As good as gold," said Bob, "and better.  Somehow he gets
thoughtful, sitting by himself so much, and thinks the strangest
things you ever heard.  He told me, coming home, that he hoped the
people saw him in the church, because he was a cripple, and it might
be pleasant to them to remember upon Christmas Day, who made lame
beggars walk and blind men see."

Bob's voice was tremulous when he told them this, and trembled more
when he said that Tiny Tim was growing strong and hearty.

His active little crutch was heard upon the floor, and back came Tiny
Tim before another word was spoken, escorted by his brother and
sister to his stool before the fire; and while Bob, turning up his
cuffs--as if, poor fellow, they were capable of being made more
shabby--compounded some hot mixture in a jug with gin and lemons, and
stirred it round and round and put it on the hob to simmer; Master
Peter, and the two ubiquitous young Cratchits went to fetch the
goose, with which they soon returned in high procession.

Such a bustle ensued that you might have thought a goose the rarest
of all birds; a feathered phenomenon, to which a black swan was a
matter of course--and in truth it was something very like it in that
house.  Mrs. Cratchit made the gravy (ready beforehand in a little
saucepan) hissing hot; Master Peter mashed the potatoes with
incredible vigor; Miss Belinda sweetened up the apple-sauce; Martha
dusted the hot plates; Bob took Tiny Tim beside him in a tiny corner
at the table; the two young Cratchits set chairs for everybody, not
forgetting themselves, and mounting guard upon their posts, crammed
spoons into their mouths, lest they should shriek for goose before
their turn came to be helped.  At last the dishes were set on, and
grace was said.  It was succeeded by a breathless pause, as Mrs.
Cratchit, looking slowly all along the carving-knife, prepared to
plunge it in the breast; but when she did, and when the long expected
gush of stuffing issued forth, one murmur of delight arose all round
the board, and even Tiny Tim, excited by the two young Cratchits,
beat on the table with the handle of his knife, and feebly cried
Hurrah!

There never was such a goose.  Bob said he didn't believe there ever
was such a goose cooked.  Its tenderness and flavor, size and
cheapness, were the themes of universal admiration.  Eked out by the
apple sauce and mashed potatoes, it was a sufficient dinner for the
whole family; indeed, as Mrs. Cratchit said with great delight
(surveying one small atom of a bone upon the dish), they hadn't ate
it all at last!  Yet every one had had enough, and the younger
Cratchits in particular, were steeped in sage-and-onion to the
eyebrows!  But now, the plates being changed by Miss Belinda, Mrs.
Cratchit left the room alone--too nervous to bear witness--to take
the pudding up and bring it in.

Suppose it should not be done enough!  Suppose it should break in
turning out!  Suppose somebody should have got over the wall of the
back-yard, and stolen it, while they were merry with the goose--a
supposition at which the two young Cratchits became livid!  All sorts
of horrors were supposed.

Hallo!  A great deal of steam!  The pudding was out of the copper.  A
smell like a washing-day!  That was the cloth.  A smell like an
eating-house and a pastry-cook's next door to each other, with a
laundress's next door to that!  That was the pudding!  In half a
minute Mrs. Cratchit entered--flushed, but smiling proudly--with the
pudding, like a speckled cannon-ball, so hard and firm, blazing in
half of half-a-quartern of ignited brandy, and bedight with Christmas
holly stuck into the top.

Oh, a wonderful pudding! Bob Cratchit said, and calmly too, that he
regarded it as the greatest success achieved by Mrs. Cratchit since
their marriage.  Mrs. Cratchit said that now the weight was off her
mind, she would confess she had had her doubts about the quantity of
flour.  Everybody had something to say about it, but nobody said or
thought it was at all a small pudding for a large family.  It would
have been flat heresy to do so.  Any Cratchit would have blushed to
hint at such a thing.

At last the dinner was all done, the cloth was cleared, the hearth
swept, and the fire made up.  The compound in the jug being tasted,
and considered perfect, apples and oranges were put upon the table,
and a shovelful of chestnuts on the fire.  Then all the Cratchit
family drew round the hearth, in what Bob Cratchit called a circle,
meaning half a one; and at Bob Cratchit's elbows stood the family
display of glass.  Two tumblers, and a custard-cup without a handle.

These held the hot stuff from the jug, however, as well as golden
goblets would have done; and Bob served it out with beaming looks,
while the chestnuts on the fire sputtered and cracked noisily.  Then
Bob proposed:

"A Merry Christmas to us all, my dears.  God bless us!"

Which all the family reechoed.

"God bless us, every one!" said Tiny Tim, the last of all.

He sat very close to his father's side upon his little stool.  Bob
held his withered little hand in his, as if he loved the child, and
wished to keep him by his side, and dreaded that he might be taken
from him.

"Spirit," said Scrooge, with an interest he had never felt before,
"tell me if Tiny Tim will live."

"I see a vacant seat," replied the Ghost, "in the poor
chimney-corner, and a crutch without an owner, carefully preserved.
If these shadows remain unaltered by the future, the child will die."

"No, no," said Scrooge.  "Oh, no, kind Spirit! say he will be spared."

"If these shadows remain unaltered by the future, none other of my
race," returned the Ghost, "will find him here.  What then?  If he be
like to die, he had better do it, and decrease the surplus
population."

Scrooge hung his head to hear his own words quoted by the Spirit, and
was overcome with penitence and grief.

"Man," said the Ghost, "if man you be in heart, not adamant, forbear
that wicked cant until you have discovered What the surplus is, and
Where it is.  Will you decide what men shall live, what men shall
die?  It may be that in the sight of Heaven you are more worthless
and less fit to live than millions like this poor man's child.  Oh
God! to hear the Insect on the leaf pronouncing on the too much life
among his hungry brothers in the dust!"

Scrooge bent before the Ghost's rebuke, and trembling cast his eyes
upon the ground.  But he raised them speedily, on hearing his own
name.

"Mr. Scrooge!" said Bob; "I'll give you Mr. Scrooge, the Founder of
the Feast!"

"The Founder of the Feast indeed!" cried Mrs. Cratchit, reddening.
"I wish I had him here.  I'd give him a piece of my mind to feast
upon, and I hope he'd have a good appetite for it."

"My dear," said Bob, "the children!  Christmas Day."

"It should be Christmas Day, I am sure," said she, "on which one
drinks the health of such an odious, stingy, hard, unfeeling man as
Mr. Scrooge.  You know he is, Robert!  Nobody knows it better than
you do, poor fellow!"

"My dear," was Bob's mild answer, "Christmas Day."

"I'll drink his health for your sake and the Day's," said Mrs.
Cratchit, "not for his.  Long life to him!  A Merry Christmas and a
Happy New Year!  He'll be very merry and very happy, I have no doubt!"

The children drank the toast after her.  It was the first of their
proceedings which had no heartiness in it.  Tiny Tim drank it last of
all, but he didn't care twopence for it.  Scrooge was the Ogre of the
family.  The mention of his name cast a dark shadow on the party,
which was not dispelled for fully five minutes.

After it had passed away, they were ten times merrier than before,
from the mere relief of Scrooge the Baleful being done with.  Bob
Cratchit told them how he had a situation in his eye for Master
Peter, which would bring in, if obtained, fully five-and-sixpence
weekly.  The two young Cratchits laughed tremendously at the idea of
Peter's being a man of business; and Peter himself looked
thoughtfully at the fire from between his collars, as if he were
deliberating what particular investments he should favor when he came
into the receipt of that bewildering income.  Martha, who was a poor
apprentice at a milliner's, then told them what kind of work she had
to do, and how many hours she worked at a stretch, and how she meant
to lie abed to-morrow morning for a good long rest; to-morrow being a
holiday she passed at home.  Also how she had seen a countess and a
lord some days before, and how the lord "was much about as tall as
Peter"; at which Peter pulled up his collars so high that you
couldn't have seen his head if you had been there.  All this time the
chestnuts and the jug went round and round; and by and by they had a
song, about a lost child traveling in the snow, from Tiny Tim, who
had a plaintive little voice, and sang it very well indeed.

There was nothing of high mark in this.  They were not a handsome
family; they were not well dressed; their shoes were far from being
waterproof; their clothes were scanty; and Peter might have known,
and very likely did, the inside of a pawnbroker's.  But, they were
happy, grateful, pleased with one another, and contented with the
time; and when they faded, and looked happier yet in the bright
sprinklings of the Spirit's torch at parting, Scrooge had his eye
upon them, and especially on Tiny Tim, until the last.

By this time it was getting dark, and snowing pretty heavily; and as
Scrooge and the Spirit went along the streets, the brightness of the
roaring fires in kitchens, parlors, and all sorts of rooms, was
wonderful.  Here the flickering of the blaze showed preparations for
a cozy dinner, with hot plates baking through and through before the
fire, and deep red curtains, ready to be drawn to shut out cold and
darkness.  There all the children of the house were running out into
the snow to meet their married sisters, brothers, cousins, uncles,
aunts, and be the first to greet them.  Here, again, were shadows on
the window-blind of guests assembling; and there a group of handsome
girls, all hooded and fur-booted, and all chattering at once, tripped
lightly off to some near neighbor's house; where, woe upon the single
man who saw them enter--artful witches: well they knew it--in a glow!

But if you had judged from the numbers of people on their way to
friendly gatherings, you might have thought that no one was at home
to give them welcome when they got there, instead of every house
expecting company, and piling up its fires half-chimney high.
Blessings on it, how the Ghost exulted!  How it bared its breadth of
breast, and opened its capacious palm, and floated on, outpouring,
with a generous hand, its bright and harmless mirth on everything
within its reach!  The very lamplighter, who ran on before dotting
the dusky street with specks of light, and who was dressed to spend
the evening somewhere, laughed out loudly as the Spirit passed:
though little kenned the lamplighter that he had any company but
Christmas!

And now, without a word of warning from the Ghost, they stood upon a
bleak and desert moor, where monstrous masses of rude stone were cast
about, as though it were the burial-place of giants; and water spread
itself wheresoever it listed, or would have done so, but for the
frost that held it prisoner; and nothing grew but moss and furze, and
coarse, rank grass.  Down in the west the setting sun had left a
streak of fiery red, which glared upon the desolation for an instant,
like a sullen eye, and frowning lower, lower, lower yet, was lost in
the thick gloom of darkest night.

"What place is this?" asked Scrooge.

"A place where Miners live, who labor in the bowels of the earth,"
returned the Spirit.  "But they know me.  See!"

A light shone from the window of a hut, and swiftly they advanced
toward it.  Passing through the wall of mud and stone, they found a
cheerful company assembled round a glowing fire.  An old, old man and
woman, with their children and their children's children, and another
generation beyond that, all decked out gaily in their holiday attire.
The old man, in a voice that seldom rose above the howling of the
wind upon the barren waste, was singing them a Christmas song; it had
been a very old song when he was a boy; and from time to time they
all joined in the chorus.  So surely as they raised their voices, the
old man got quite blithe and loud; and so surely as they stopped, his
vigor sank again.

The Spirit did not tarry here, but bade Scrooge hold his robe, and
passing on above the moor, sped whither?  Not to sea?  To sea.  To
Scrooge's horror, looking back, he saw the last of the land, a
frightful range of rocks, behind them; and his ears were deafened by
the thundering of water, as it rolled, and roared, and raged among
the dreadful caverns it had worn, and fiercely tried to undermine the
earth.

Built upon a dismal reef of sunken rocks, some league or so from
shore, on which the waters chafed and dashed, the wild year through,
there stood a solitary lighthouse.  Great heaps of seaweed clung to
its base, and storm-birds--born of the wind one might suppose, as
seaweed of the water--rose and fell about it, like the waves they
skimmed.

But even here, two men who watched the light had made a fire, that
through the loophole in the thick stone wall shed out a ray of
brightness on the awful sea.  Joining their horny hands over the
rough table at which they sat, they wished each other Merry Christmas
in their can of grog; and one of them: the elder, too, with his face
all damaged and scarred with hard weather, as the figure-head of an
old ship might be: struck up a sturdy song that was like a Gale in
itself.

Again the Ghost sped on, above the black and heaving sea--on,
on--until, being far away, as he told Scrooge, from any shore, they
lighted on a ship.  They stood beside the helmsman at the wheel, the
lookout in the bow, the officers who had the watch; dark, ghostly
figures in their several stations; but every man among them hummed a
Christmas tune, or had a Christmas thought, or spoke below his breath
to his companion of some bygone Christmas Day, with homeward hopes
belonging to it.  And every man on board, waking or sleeping, good or
bad, had had a kinder word for another on that day than on any day in
the year; and had shared to some extent in its festivities; and had
remembered those he cared for at a distance, and had known that they
delighted to remember him.

It was a great surprise to Scrooge, while listening to the moaning of
the wind, and thinking what a solemn thing it was to move on through
the lonely darkness over an unknown abyss, whose depths were secrets
as profound as Death: it was a great surprise to Scrooge, while thus
engaged, to hear a hearty laugh.  It was a much greater surprise to
Scrooge to recognize it as his own nephew's and to find himself in a
bright, dry, gleaming room, with the Spirit standing smiling by his
side, and looking at that same nephew with approving affability.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Scrooge's nephew.  "Ha, ha, ha!"

If you should happen, by any unlikely chance, to know a man more
blest in a laugh than Scrooge's nephew, all I can say is, I should
like to know him too.  Introduce him to me, and I'll cultivate his
acquaintance.

It is a fair, even-handed, noble adjustment of things, that while
there is infection in disease and sorrow, there is nothing in the
world so irresistibly contagious as laughter and good-humor.  When
Scrooge's nephew laughed in this way: holding his sides, rolling his
head, and twisting his face into the most extravagant contortions:
Scrooge's niece, by marriage, laughed as heartily as he.  And their
assembled friends being not a bit behindhand, roared out, lustily.

"Ha, ha!  Ha, ha, ha, ha!"

"He said that Christmas was a humbug, as I live!" cried Scrooge's
nephew.  "He believed it too!"

"More shame for him, Fred!" said Scrooge's niece, indignantly.  Bless
those women; they never do anything by halves.  They are always in
earnest.

She was very pretty; exceedingly pretty.  With a dimpled,
surprised-looking, capital face; a ripe little mouth, that seemed
made to be kissed--as no doubt it was; all kinds of good little dots
about her chin, that melted into one another when she laughed; and
the sunniest pair of eyes you ever saw in any little creature's head.
Altogether she was what you would have called provoking, you know;
but satisfactory, too.  Oh, perfectly satisfactory!

"He's a comical old fellow," said Scrooge's nephew, "that's the
truth; and not so pleasant as he might be.  However, his offenses
carry their own punishment, and I have nothing to say against him."

"I'm sure he is very rich, Fred," hinted Scrooge's niece.  "At least
you always tell _me_ so."

"What of that, my dear!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "His wealth is of no
use to him.  He don't do any good with it.  He don't make himself
comfortable with it.  He hasn't the satisfaction of thinking--ha, ha,
ha!--that he is ever going to benefit Us with it."

"I have no patience with him," observed Scrooge's niece.  Scrooge's
niece's sisters, and all the other ladies, expressed the same opinion.

"Oh, I have!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "I am sorry for him; I couldn't
be angry with him if I tried.  Who suffers by his ill whims?
Himself, always.  Here, he takes it into his head to dislike us, and
he won't come and dine with us.  What's the consequence?  He don't
lose much of a dinner."

"Indeed, I think he loses a very good dinner," interrupted Scrooge's
niece.  Everybody else said the same, and they must be allowed to
have been competent judges, because they had just had dinner; and,
with the dessert upon the table, were clustered round the fire, by
lamplight.

"Well!  I'm very glad to hear it," said Scrooge's nephew, "because I
haven't any great faith in these young housekeepers.  What do you
say, Topper?"

Topper had clearly got his eye upon one of Scrooge's niece's sisters,
for he answered that a bachelor was a wretched outcast, who had no
right to express an opinion on the subject.  Whereat Scrooge's
niece's sister--the plump one with the lace tucker: not the one with
the roses--blushed.

"Do go on, Fred," said Scrooge's niece, clapping her hands.  "He
never finishes what he begins to say.  He is such a ridiculous
fellow!"

Scrooge's nephew reveled in another laugh, and as it was impossible
to keep the infection off; though the plump sister tried hard to do
it with aromatic vinegar; his example was unanimously followed.

"I was only going to say," said Scrooge's nephew, "that the
consequence of his taking a dislike to us, and not making merry with
us, is, as I think, that he loses some pleasant moments, which could
do him no harm.  I am sure he loses pleasanter companions than he can
find in his own thoughts, either in his moldy old office, or his
dusty chambers.  I mean to give him the same chance every year,
whether he likes it or not, for I pity him.  He may rail at Christmas
till he dies, but he can't help thinking better of it--I defy him--if
he finds me going there, in good temper, year after year, and saying,
'Uncle Scrooge, how are you?'  If it only puts him in the vein to
leave his poor clerk fifty pounds, _that's_ something; and I think I
shook him yesterday."

It was their turn to laugh now at the notion of his shaking Scrooge.
But being thoroughly good-natured, and not much caring what they
laughed at, so that they laughed at any rate, he encouraged them in
their merriment, and passed the bottle joyously.

After tea, they had some music.  For they were a musical family, and
knew what they were about, when they sang a Glee or Catch, I can
assure you: especially Topper, who could growl away in the bass like
a good one, and never swell the large veins in his forehead, or get
red in the face over it.  Scrooge's niece played well upon the harp;
and played among other tunes a simple little air (a mere nothing: you
might learn to whistle it in two minutes), which had been familiar to
the child who fetched Scrooge from the boarding-school, as he had
been reminded by the Ghost of Christmas Past.  When this strain of
music sounded, all the things that Ghost had shown him came upon his
mind; he softened more and more; and thought that if he could have
listened to it often, years ago, he might have cultivated the
kindnesses of life for his own happiness with his own hands, without
resorting to the sexton's spade that buried Jacob Marley.

But they didn't devote the whole evening to music.  After a while
they played at forfeits; for it is good to be children sometimes, and
never better than at Christmas, when its mighty Founder was a child
himself.  Stop!  There was first a game at blind-man's buff.  Of
course there was.  And I no more believe Topper was really blind than
I believe he had eyes in his boots.  My opinion is, that it was a
done thing between him and Scrooge's nephew: and that the Ghost of
Christmas Present knew it.  The way he went after that plump sister
in the lace tucker was an outrage on the credulity of human nature.
Knocking down the fire-irons, tumbling over the chairs, bumping up
against the piano, smothering himself among the curtains, wherever
she went, there went he.  He always knew where the plump sister was.
He wouldn't catch anybody else.  If you had fallen up against him, as
some of them did, and stood there; he would have made a feint of
endeavoring to seize you, which would have been an affront to your
understanding; and would instantly have sidled off in the direction
of the plump sister.  She often cried out that it wasn't fair; and it
really was not.  But when at last he caught her; when, in spite of
all her silken rustlings, and her rapid flutterings past him, he got
her into a corner whence there was no escape; then his conduct was
the most execrable.  For his pretending not to know her; his
pretending that it was necessary to touch her head-dress, and further
to assure himself of her identity by pressing a certain ring upon her
finger, and a certain chain about her neck; was vile, monstrous!  No
doubt she told him her opinion of it, when, another blind man being
in office, they were so very confidential together, behind the
curtains.

Scrooge's niece was not one of the blind-man's buff party, but was
made comfortable with a large chair and a footstool, in a snug
corner, where the Ghost and Scrooge were close behind her.  But she
joined in the forfeits, and loved her love to admiration with all the
letters of the alphabet.  Likewise at the game of How, When, and
Where, she was very great, and to the secret joy of Scrooge's nephew,
beat her sisters hollow: though they were sharp girls too, as Topper
could have told you.  There might have been twenty people there,
young and old, but they all played, and so did Scrooge; for, wholly
forgetting in the interest he had in what was going on, that his
voice made no sound in their ears, he sometimes came out with his
guess quite loud, and very often guessed quite right, too; for the
sharpest needle, best Whitechapel, warranted not to cut in the eye,
was not sharper than Scrooge: blunt as he took it in his head to be.

The Ghost was greatly pleased to find him in this mood, and looked
upon him with such favor that he begged like a boy to be allowed to
stay until the guests departed.  But this the Spirit said could not
be done.

"Here is a new game," said Scrooge.  "One half-hour, Spirit, only
one!"

It is a Game called Yes and No, where Scrooge's nephew had to think
of something, and the rest must find out what; he only answering to
their questions yes or no, as the case was.  The brisk fire of
questioning to which he was exposed elicited from him that he was
thinking of an animal, a live animal, rather a disagreeable animal, a
savage animal, an animal that growled and grunted sometimes, and
talked sometimes, and lived in London, and walked about the streets,
and wasn't made a show of, and wasn't led by anybody, and didn't live
in a menagerie, and was never killed in a market, and was not a
horse, or an ass, or a cow, or a bull, or a tiger, or a dog, or a
pig, or a cat, or a bear.  At every fresh question that was put to
him, this nephew burst into a fresh roar of laughter; and was so
inexpressibly tickled that he was obliged to get up off the sofa and
stamp.  At last the plump sister, falling into a similar state, cried
out:

"I have found it out!  I know what it is, Fred!  I know what it is!"

"What is it?" cried Fred.

"It's your Uncle Scro-o-o-o-oge!"

Which it certainly was.  Admiration was the universal sentiment,
though some objected that the reply to "Is it a bear?" ought to have
been "Yes"; inasmuch as an answer in the negative was sufficient to
have diverted their thoughts from Mr. Scrooge, supposing they had
ever had any tendency that way.

"He has given us plenty of merriment, I am sure," said Fred, "and it
would be ungrateful not to drink his health.  Here is a glass of
mulled wine ready to our hand at the moment; and I say, 'Uncle
Scrooge!'"

"Well!  Uncle Scrooge!" they cried.

"A Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year to the old man, whatever he
is!" said Scrooge's nephew.  "He wouldn't take it from me, but may he
have it, nevertheless.  Uncle Scrooge!"

Uncle Scrooge had imperceptibly become so gay and light of heart that
he would have pledged the unconscious company in return, and thanked
them in an inaudible speech, if the Ghost had given him time.  But
the whole scene passed off in the breath of the last word spoken by
his nephew; and he and the Spirit were again upon their travels.

Much they saw, and far they went, and many homes they visited, but
always with a happy end.  The Spirit stood beside sick beds, and they
were cheerful; on foreign lands, and they were close at home; by
struggling men, and they were patient in their greater hope; by
poverty, and it was rich.  In almshouse, hospital, and jail, in
misery's every refuge, where vain man in his little brief authority
had not made fast the door, and barred the Spirit out, he left his
blessing, and taught Scrooge his precepts.

It was a long night, if it were only a night; but Scrooge had his
doubts of this, because the Christmas Holidays appeared to be
condensed into the space of time they passed together.  It was
strange, too, that while Scrooge remained unaltered in his outward
form, the Ghost grew older, clearly older.  Scrooge had observed this
change, but never spoke of it until they left a children's Twelfth
Night party, when, looking at the Spirit as they stood together in an
open place, he noticed that its hair was gray.

"Are spirits' lives so short?" asked Scrooge.

"My life upon this globe is very brief," replied the Ghost.  "It ends
to-night."

"To-night!" cried Scrooge.

"To-night at midnight.  Hark!  The time is drawing near."

The chimes were ringing the three-quarters past eleven at that moment.

"Forgive me if I am not justified in what I ask," said Scrooge,
looking intently at the Spirit's robe, "but I see something strange,
and not belonging to yourself, protruding from your skirts.  Is it a
foot or a claw!"

"It might be a claw, for the flesh there is upon it," was the
Spirit's sorrowful reply.  "Look here."

From the foldings of its robe it brought two children; wretched,
abject, frightful, hideous, miserable.  They knelt down at its feet,
and clung upon the outside of its garment.

"Oh, Man! look here.  Look, look, down here!" exclaimed the Ghost.

They were a boy and girl.  Yellow, meagre, ragged, scowling, wolfish;
but, prostrate, too, in their humility.  Where graceful youth should
have filled their features out, and touched them with its freshest
tints, a stale and shriveled hand, like that of age, had pinched, and
twisted them, and pulled them into shreds.  Where angels might have
sat enthroned, devils lurked, and glared out menacing.  No change, no
degradation, no perversion of humanity, in any grade, through all the
mysteries of wonderful creation, has monsters half so horrible and
dread.

Scrooge started back, appalled.  Having them shown to him in this
way, he tried to say they were fine children, but the words choked
themselves rather than be parties to a lie of such enormous magnitude.

"Spirit! are they yours?" Scrooge could say no more.

"They are Man's," said the Spirit, looking down upon them.  "And they
cling to me, appealing from their fathers.  This boy is Ignorance.
This girl is Want.  Beware them both, and all of their degree, but
most of all beware this boy, for on his brow I see that written which
is Doom, unless the writing be erased.  Deny it!" cried the Spirit,
stretching out its hand toward the City.  "Slander those who tell it
ye!  Admit it for your factious purposes, and make it worse!  And
bide the end!"

"Have they no refuge or resource?" cried Scrooge.

"Are there no prisons?" said the Spirit, turning on him for the last
time with his own words.  "Are there no workhouses?"

The bell struck twelve.

Scrooge looked about him for the Ghost, and saw it not.  As the last
stroke ceased to vibrate, he remembered the prediction of old Jacob
Marley, and lifting up his eyes, beheld a solemn Phantom, draped and
hooded, coming, like a mist along the ground, toward him.




STAVE FOUR

_The Last of the Spirits_

The phantom slowly, gravely, silently approached.  When it came near
him, Scrooge bent down upon his knee; for in the very air through
which this Spirit moved it seemed to scatter gloom and mystery.

It was shrouded in a deep black garment, which concealed its head,
its face, its form, and left nothing of it visible save one
outstretched hand.  But for this it would have been difficult to
detach its figure from the night, and separate it from the darkness
by which it was surrounded.

He felt that it was tall and stately when it came beside him, and
that its mysterious presence filled him with a solemn dread.  He knew
no more, for the Spirit neither spoke nor moved.

"I am in the presence of the Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come?" said
Scrooge.

The Spirit answered not, but pointed downward with its hand.

"You are about to show me shadows of the things that have not
happened, but will happen in the time before us," Scrooge pursued.
"Is that so, Spirit?"

The upper portion of the garment was contracted for an instant in its
folds, as if the Spirit had inclined its head.  That was the only
answer he received.

Although well used to ghostly company by this time, Scrooge feared
the silent shape so much that his legs trembled beneath him, and he
found that he could hardly stand when he prepared to follow it.  The
Spirit paused a moment, as if observing his condition, and giving him
time to recover.

But Scrooge was all the worse for this.  It thrilled him with a vague
uncertain horror, to know that behind the dusky shroud there were
ghostly eyes intently fixed upon him, while he, though he stretched
his own to the utmost, could see nothing but a spectral hand and one
great heap of black.

"Ghost of the Future!" he exclaimed, "I fear you more than any
Spectre I have seen.  But, as I know your purpose is to do me good,
and as I hope to live to be another man from what I was, I am
prepared to bear you company, and do it with a thankful heart.  Will
you not speak to me?"

It gave him no reply.  The hand was pointed straight before them.

"Lead on!" said Scrooge.  "Lead on!  The night is waning fast, and it
is precious time to me, I know.  Lead on, Spirit!"

The Phantom moved away as it had come toward him.  Scrooge followed
in the shadow of its dress, which bore him up, he thought, and
carried him along.

They scarcely seemed to enter the City; for the City rather seemed to
spring up about them, and encompass them of its own act.  But there
they were, in the heart of it; on 'Change, among the merchants; who
hurried up and down, and chinked the money in their pockets, and
conversed in groups, and looked at their watches, and trifled
thoughtfully with their great gold seals; and so forth, as Scrooge
had seen them often.

The Spirit stopped beside one little knot of business men.  Observing
that the hand was pointed to them, Scrooge advanced to listen to
their talk.

"No," said a great fat man with a monstrous chin, "I don't know much
about it, either way.  I only know he's dead."

"When did he die?" inquired another.

"Last night, I believe."

"Why, what was the matter with him?" asked a third, taking a vast
quantity of snuff out of a very large snuffbox.  "I thought he'd
never die."

"God knows," said the first, with a yawn.

"What has he done with his money?" asked a red-faced gentleman with a
pendulous excrescence on the end of his nose, that shook like the
gills of a turkey-cock.

"I haven't heard," said the man with the large chin, yawning again.
"Left it to his Company, perhaps.  He hasn't left it to me.  That's
all I know."

This pleasantry was received with a general laugh.

"It's likely to be a very cheap funeral," said the same speaker; "for
upon my life I don't know of anybody to go to it.  Suppose we make up
a party and volunteer?"

"I don't mind going if a lunch is provided," observed the gentleman
with the excrescence on his nose.  "But I must be fed, if I make one."

Another laugh.

"Well, I am the most disinterested among you, after all," said the
first speaker, "for I never wear black gloves, and I never eat lunch.
But I'll offer to go, if anybody else will.  When I come to think of
it, I'm not at all sure that I wasn't his most particular friend; for
we used to stop and speak whenever we met.  By-by!"

Speakers and listeners strolled away, and mixed with other groups.
Scrooge knew the men, and looked toward the Spirit for an explanation.

The Phantom glided on into a street.  Its finger pointed to two
persons meeting.  Scrooge listened again, thinking that the
explanation might lie here.

He knew these men, also, perfectly.  They were men of business: very
wealthy, and of great importance.  He had made a point always of
standing well in their esteem: in a business point of view, that is;
strictly in a business point of view.

"How are you?" said one.

"How are you?" returned the other.

"Well!" said the first.  "Old Scratch has got his own at last, hey?"

"So I am told," returned the second.  "Cold, isn't it?"

"Seasonable for Christmas time.  You're not a skater, I suppose?"

"No.  No.  Something else to think of.  Good-morning!"

Not another word.  That was their meeting, their conversation, and
their parting.

Scrooge was at first inclined to be surprised that the Spirit should
attach importance to conversations apparently so trivial; but feeling
assured that they must have some hidden purpose, he set himself to
consider what it was likely to be.  They could scarcely be supposed
to have any bearing on the death of Jacob, his old partner, for that
was Past, and this Ghost's province was the Future.  Nor could he
think of any one immediately connected with himself to whom he could
apply them.  But nothing doubting that to whomsoever they applied
they had some latent moral for his own improvement, he resolved to
treasure up every word he heard, and everything he saw; and
especially to observe the shadow of himself when it appeared.  For he
had an expectation that the conduct of his future self would give him
the clue he missed, and would render the solution of these riddles
easy.

He looked about in that very place for his own image; but another man
stood in his accustomed corner, and though the clock pointed to his
usual time of day for being there, he saw no likeness of himself
among the multitudes that poured in through the Porch.  It gave him
little surprise, however; for he had been revolving in his mind a
change of life, and thought and hoped he saw his new-born resolutions
carried out in this.

Quiet and dark beside him stood the Phantom, with its outstretched
hand.  When he roused himself from his thoughtful quest, he fancied
from the turn of the hand, and its situation in reference to himself,
that the Unseen Eyes were looking at him keenly.  It made him
shudder, and feel very cold.

They left the busy scene, and went into an obscure part of the town,
where Scrooge had never penetrated before, although he recognized its
situation, and its bad repute.  The ways were foul and narrow; the
shops and houses wretched; the people half-naked, drunken, slipshod,
ugly.  Alleys and archways, like so many cesspools, disgorged their
offenses of smell, and dirt, and life, upon the straggling streets;
and the whole quarter reeked with crime; with filth, and misery.

Far in this den of infamous resort, there was a low-browed, beetling
shop, below a pent-house roof, where iron, old rags, bottles, bones,
and greasy offal, were bought.  Upon the floor within, were piled up
heaps of rusty keys, nails, chains, hinges, files, scales, weights,
and refuse iron of all kinds.  Secrets that few would like to
scrutinize were bred and hidden in mountains of unseemly rags, masses
of corrupted fat, and sepulchres of bones.  Sitting in among the
wares he dealt in, by a charcoal-stove, made of old bricks, was a
gray-haired rascal, nearly seventy years of age; who had screened
himself from the cold air without by a frowsy curtaining of
miscellaneous tatters hung upon a line; and smoked his pipe in all
the luxury of calm retirement.

Scrooge and the Phantom came into the presence of this man, just as a
woman with a heavy bundle slunk into the shop.  But she had scarcely
entered, when another woman, similarly laden, came in too; and she
was closely followed by a man in faded black, who was no less
startled by the sight of them than they had been upon the recognition
of each other.  After a short period of blank astonishment, in which
the old man with the pipe had joined them, they all three burst into
a laugh.

"Let the charwoman alone to be the first!" cried she who had entered
first.  "Let the laundress alone to be the second; and let the
undertaker's man alone to be the third.  Look here, old Joe, here's a
chance!  If we haven't all three met here without meaning it!"

"You couldn't have met in a better place," said old Joe, removing his
pipe from his mouth.  "Come into the parlor.  You were made free of
it long ago, you know; and the other two an't strangers.  Stop till I
shut the door of the shop.  Ah!  How it skreeks!  There an't such a
rusty bit of metal in the place as its own hinges, I believe; and I'm
sure there's no such old bones here as mine.  Ha, ha!  We're all
suitable to our calling, we're well matched.  Come into the parlor.
Come into the parlor."

The parlor was the space behind the screen of rags.  The old man
raked the fire together with an old stair-rod, and having trimmed his
smoky lamp (for it was night) with the stem of his pipe, put it in
his mouth again.

While he did this, the woman who had already spoken threw her bundle
on the floor, and sat down in a flaunting manner on a stool; crossing
her elbows on her knees, and looking with a bold defiance at the
other two.

"What odds then!  What odds, Mrs. Dilber?" said the woman.  "Every
person has a right to take care of themselves.  _He_ always did!"

"That's true, indeed!" said the laundress.  "No man more so."

"Why, then, don't stand staring as if you was afraid, woman; who's
the wiser?  We're not going to pick holes in each other's coats, I
suppose?"

"No, indeed!" said Mrs. Dilber and the man together.  "We should hope
not."

"Very well, then!" cried the woman.  "That's enough.  Who's the worse
for the loss of a few things like these?  Not a dead man, I suppose."

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Dilber, laughing.

"If he wanted to keep 'em after he was dead, a wicked old screw,"
pursued the woman, "why wasn't he natural in his lifetime?  If he had
been, he'd have had somebody to look after him when he was struck
with Death, instead of lying gasping out his last there, alone by
himself."

"It's the truest word that ever was spoke," said Mrs. Dilber.  "It's
a judgment on him."

"I wish it was a little heavier one," replied the woman; "and it
should have been, you may depend upon it, if I could have laid my
hands on anything else.  Open that bundle, old Joe, and let me know
the value of it.  Speak out plain.  I'm not afraid to be the first,
nor afraid for them to see it.  We knew pretty well that we were
helping ourselves, before we met here, I believe.  It's no sin.  Open
the bundle, Joe."

But the gallantry of her friends would not allow of this; and the man
in faded black, mounting the breach first, produced his plunder.  It
was not extensive.  A seal or two, a pencil-case, a pair of
sleeve-buttons, and a brooch of no great value, were all.  They were
severally examined and appraised by old Joe, who chalked the sums he
was disposed to give for each upon the wall, and added them up into a
total when he found there was nothing more to come.

"That's your account," said Joe, "and I wouldn't give another
sixpence if I was to be boiled for not doing it.  Who's next?"

Mrs. Dilber was next.  Sheets and towels, a little wearing apparel,
two old-fashioned silver teaspoons, a pair of sugar-tongs, and a few
boots.  Her account was stated on the wall in the same manner.

"I always give too much to ladies.  It's a weakness of mine, and
that's the way I ruin myself," said old Joe.  "That's your account.
If you asked me for another penny, and made it an open question, I'd
repent of being so liberal and knock off half-a-crown."

"And now undo my bundle, Joe," said the first woman.

Joe went down on his knees for the greater convenience of opening it,
and having unfastened a great many knots, dragged out a large and
heavy roll of some dark stuff.

"What do you call this?" said Joe.  "Bed-curtains!"

"Ah!" returned the woman, laughing and leaning forward on her crossed
arms.  "Bed-curtains!"

"You don't mean to say you took 'em down, rings and all, with him
lying there?" said Joe.

"Yes, I do," replied the woman.  "Why not?"

"You were born to make your fortune," said Joe, "and you'll certainly
do it."

"I certainly shan't hold my hand when I can get anything in it by
reaching it out, for the sake of such a man as He was, I promise you,
Joe," returned the woman coolly.  "Don't drop that oil upon the
blankets, now."

"His blankets?" asked Joe.

"Whose else's do you think?" replied the woman.  "He isn't likely to
take cold without 'em, I dare say."

"I hope he didn't die of anything catching, eh?" said old Joe,
stopping in his work, and looking up.

"Don't you be afraid of that," returned the woman.  "I an't so fond
of his company that I'd loiter about him for such things, if he did.
Ah! you may look through that shirt till your eyes ache; but you
won't find a hole in it, nor a threadbare place.  It's the best he
had, and a fine one too.  They'd have wasted it, if it hadn't been
for me."

"What do you call wasting of it?" asked old Joe.

"Putting it on him to be buried in, to be sure," replied the woman
with a laugh.  "Somebody was fool enough to do it, but I took it off
again.  If calico an't good enough for such a purpose, it isn't good
enough for anything.  It's quite as becoming to the body.  He can't
look uglier than he did in that one."

Scrooge listened to this dialogue in horror.  As they sat grouped
about their spoil, in the scanty light afforded by the old man's
lamp, he viewed them with a detestation and disgust which could
hardly have been greater, though they had been obscene demons,
marketing the corpse itself.

"Ha, ha!" laughed the same woman, when old Joe, producing a flannel
bag with money in it, told out their several gains upon the ground.
"This is the end of it, you see!  He frightened every one away from
him when he was alive, to profit us when he was dead!  Ha, ha, ha!"

"Spirit!" said Scrooge, shuddering from head to foot.  "I see, I see.
The case of this unhappy man might be my own.  My life tends that
way, now.  Merciful Heaven, what is this!"

He recoiled in terror, for the scene had changed, and now he almost
touched a bed: a bare, uncurtained bed: on which, beneath a ragged
sheet, there lay a something covered up, which, though it was dumb,
announced itself in awful language.

The room was very dark, too dark to be observed with any accuracy,
though Scrooge glanced round it in obedience to a secret impulse,
anxious to know what kind of room it was.  A pale light, rising in
the outer air, fell straight upon the bed; and on it, plundered and
bereft, unwatched, unwept, uncared for, was the body of this man.

Scrooge glanced toward the Phantom.  Its steady hand was pointed to
the head.  The cover was so carelessly adjusted that the slightest
raising of it, the motion of a finger upon Scrooge's part, would have
disclosed the face.  He thought of it, felt how easy it would be to
do, and longed to do it; but had no more power to withdraw the veil
than to dismiss the spectre at his side.

Oh, cold, cold, rigid, dreadful Death, set up thine altar here, and
dress it with such terrors as thou hast at thy command: for this is
thy dominion!  But of the loved, revered, and honored head, thou
canst not turn one hair to thy dread purposes, or make one feature
odious.  It is not that the hand is heavy and will fall down when
released; it is not that the heart and pulse are still; but that the
hand was open, generous, and true; the heart brave, warm, and tender;
and the pulse a man's.  Strike, Shadow, strike!  And see his good
deeds springing from the wound, to sow the world with life immortal!

No voice pronounced these words in Scrooge's ears, and yet he heard
them when he looked upon the bed.  He thought, if this man could be
raised up now, what would be his foremost thoughts?  Avarice, hard
dealing, griping cares?  They have brought him to a rich end, truly!

He lay in the dark, empty house, with not a man, a woman, or a child
to say that he was kind to me in this or that, and for the memory of
one kind word I will be kind to him.  A cat was tearing at the door,
and there was a sound of gnawing rats beneath the hearthstone.  What
they wanted in the room of death, and why they were so restless and
disturbed, Scrooge did not dare to think.

"Spirit!" he said, "this is a fearful place.  In leaving it, I shall
not leave its lesson, trust me.  Let us go!"

Still the Ghost pointed with an unmoved finger to the head.

"I understand you," Scrooge returned, "and I would do it, if I could.
But I have not the power, Spirit.  I have not the power."

Again it seemed to look upon him.

"If there is any person in the town who feels emotion caused by this
man's death," said Scrooge, quite agonized, "show that person to me,
Spirit, I beseech you!"

The Phantom spread its dark robe before him for a moment, like a
wing; and withdrawing it, revealed a room by daylight, where a mother
and her children were.

She was expecting some one, and with anxious eagerness; for she
walked up and down the room; started at every sound; looked out from
the window; glanced at the clock; tried, but in vain, to work with
her needle; and could hardly bear the voices of the children in their
play.

At length the long-expected knock was heard.  She hurried to the
door, and met her husband; a man whose face was careworn and
depressed, though he was young.  There was a remarkable expression in
it now; a kind of serious delight of which he felt ashamed, and which
he struggled to repress.

He sat down to the dinner that had been hoarding for him by the fire;
and when she asked him faintly what news (which was not until after a
long silence), he appeared embarrassed how to answer.

"Is it good," she said, "or bad?"--to help him.

"Bad," he answered.

"We are quite ruined?"

"No.  There is hope yet, Caroline."

"If _he_ relents," she said, amazed, "there is!  Nothing is past
hope, if such a miracle has happened."

"He is past relenting," said her husband.  "He is dead."

She was a mild and patient creature if her face spoke truth; but she
was thankful in her soul to hear it, and she said so, with clasped
hands.  She prayed forgiveness the next moment, and was sorry; but
the first was the emotion of her heart.

"What the half-drunken woman whom I told you of last night, said to
me, when I tried to see him and obtain a week's delay; and what I
thought was a mere excuse to avoid me; turns out to have been quite
true.  He was not only very ill, but dying, then."

"To whom will our debt be transferred?"

"I don't know.  But before that time we shall be ready with the
money; and even though we were not, it would be bad fortune indeed to
find so merciless a creditor in his successor.  We may sleep to-night
with light hearts, Caroline!"

Yes.  Soften it as they would, their hearts were lighter.  The
children's faces, hushed, and clustered round to hear what they so
little understood, were brighter; and it was a happier house for this
man's death!  The only emotion that the Ghost could show him, caused
by the event, was one of pleasure.

"Let me see some tenderness connected with a death," said Scrooge;
"or that dark chamber, Spirit, which we left just now, will be
forever present to me."

The Ghost conducted him through several streets familiar to his feet;
and as they went along, Scrooge looked here and there to find
himself, but nowhere was he to be seen.  They entered poor Bob
Cratchit's house; the dwelling he had visited before; and found the
mother and the children seated round the fire.

Quiet.  Very quiet.  The noisy little Cratchits were as still as
statues in one corner, and sat looking up at Peter, who had a book
before him.  The mother and her daughters were engaged in sewing.
But surely they were very quiet!

"'And He took a child, and set him in the midst of them.'"

Where had Scrooge heard those words?  He had not dreamed them.  The
boy must have read them out, as he and the Spirit crossed the
threshold.  Why did he not go on?  The mother laid her work upon the
table, and put her hand up to her face.

"The color hurts my eyes," she said.

The color?  Ah, poor Tiny Tim!

"They're better now again," said Cratchit's wife.  "It makes them
weak by candlelight; and I wouldn't show weak eyes to your father
when he comes home, for the world.  It must be near his time."

"Past it rather," Peter answered, shutting up his book.  "But I think
he's walked a little slower than he used, these few last evenings,
mother."

They were very quiet again.  At last she said, and in a steady
cheerful voice, that only faltered once:

"I have known him walk with--I have known him walk with Tiny Tim upon
his shoulder, very fast indeed."

"And so have I," cried Peter.  "Often."

"And so have I," exclaimed another.  So had all.

"But he was very light to carry," she resumed, intent upon her work,
"and his father loved him so, that it was no trouble--no trouble.
And there is your father at the door!"

She hurried out to meet him; and little Bob in his comforter--he had
need of it, poor fellow--came in.  His tea was ready for him on the
hob, and they all tried who should help him to it most.  Then the two
young Cratchits got upon his knees and laid, each child a little
cheek, against his face, as if they said, "Don't mind it, father.
Don't be grieved!"

Bob was very cheerful with them, and spoke pleasantly to all the
family.  He looked at the work upon the table, and praised the
industry and speed of Mrs. Cratchit and the girls.  They would be
done long before Sunday he said.

"Sunday?  You went to-day, then, Robert?" said his wife.

"Yes, my dear," returned Bob.  "I wish you could have gone.  It would
have done you good to see how green a place it is.  But you'll see it
often.  I promised him that I would walk there on a Sunday.  My
little, little child!" cried Bob.  "My little child!"

He broke down all at once.  He couldn't help it.  If he could have
helped it, he and his child would have been further apart perhaps
than they were.

He left the room, and went upstairs into the room above, which was
lighted cheerfully, and hung with Christmas.  There was a chair set
close beside the child, and there were signs of some one having been
there, lately.  Poor Bob sat down in it, and when he had thought a
little and composed himself, he kissed the little face.  He was
reconciled to what had happened, and went down again quite happy.

They drew about the fire, and talked; the girls and mother working
still.  Bob told them of the extraordinary kindness of Mr. Scrooge's
nephew, whom he had scarcely seen but once, and who, meeting him in
the street that day, and seeing that he looked a little--"just a
little down you know," said Bob, inquired what had happened to
distress him.  "On which," said Bob, "for he is the
pleasantest-spoken gentleman you ever heard, I told him.  'I am
heartily sorry for it, Mr. Cratchit,' he said, 'and heartily sorry
for your good wife.'  By the by, how he ever knew that, I don't know."

"Knew what, my dear?"

"Why, that you were a good wife," replied Bob.

"Everybody knows that!" said Peter.

"Very well observed, my boy!" cried Bob.  "I hope they do.  'Heartily
sorry,' he said, 'for your good wife.  If I can be of service to you
in any way,' he said, giving me his card, 'that's where I live.  Pray
come to me.'  Now, it wasn't," cried Bob, "for the sake of anything
he might be able to do for us, so much as for his kind way, that this
was quite delightful.  It really seemed as if he had known our Tiny
Tim, and felt with us."

"I'm sure he's a good soul!" said Mrs. Cratchit.

"You would be surer of it, my dear," returned Bob, "if you saw and
spoke to him.  I shouldn't be at all surprised, mark what I say, if
he got Peter a better situation."

"Only hear that, Peter," said Mrs. Cratchit.

"And then," cried one of the girls, "Peter will be keeping company
with some one, and setting up for himself."

"Get along with you!" retorted Peter, grinning.

"It's just as likely as not," said Bob, "one of these days; though
there's plenty of time for that, my dear.  But however and whenever
we part from one another, I am sure we shall none of us forget poor
Tiny Tim--shall we--or this first parting that there was among us?"

"Never, father!" cried they all.

"And I know," said Bob, "I know, my dears, that when we recollect how
patient and how mild he was; although he was a little, little child;
we shall not quarrel easily among ourselves, and forget poor Tiny Tim
in doing it."

"No, never, father!" they all cried again.

"I am very happy," said little Bob, "I am very happy!"

Mrs. Cratchit kissed him, his daughters kissed him, the two young
Cratchits kissed him, and Peter and himself shook hands.  Spirit of
Tiny Tim, thy childish essence was from God!

"Spectre," said Scrooge, "something informs me that our parting
moment is at hand.  I know it, but I know not how.  Tell me what man
that was whom we saw lying dead?"

The Ghost of Christmas Yet To Come conveyed him, as before--though at
a different time, he thought: indeed, there seemed no order in these
latter visions, save that they were in the Future--into the resorts
of business men, but showed him not himself.  Indeed, the Spirit did
not stay for anything, but went straight on, as to the end just now
desired, until besought by Scrooge to tarry for a moment.

"This court," said Scrooge, "through which we hurry now, is where my
place of occupation is, and has been for a length of time.  I see the
house.  Let me behold what I shall be, in days to come!"

The Spirit stopped; the hand was pointed elsewhere.

"The house is yonder," Scrooge exclaimed.  "Why do you point away?"

The inexorable finger underwent no change.

Scrooge hastened to the window of his office, and looked in.  It was
an office still, but not his.  The furniture was not the same, and
the figure in the chair was not himself.  The Phantom pointed as
before.

He joined it once again, and wondering why and whither he had gone,
accompanied it until they reached an iron gate.  He paused to look
round before entering.

A churchyard.  Here, then, the wretched man whose name he had now to
learn, lay underneath the ground.  It was a worthy place.  Walled in
by houses; overrun by grass and weeds, the growth of vegetation's
death, not life; choked up with too much burying; fat with repleted
appetite.  A worthy place!

The Spirit stood among the graves, and pointed down to One.  He
advanced toward it trembling.  The Phantom was exactly as it had
been, but he dreaded that he saw new meaning in its solemn shape.

"Before I draw nearer to that stone to which you point," said
Scrooge, "answer me one question.  Are these the shadows of the
things that Will be, or are they shadows of things that May be, only?"

Still the Ghost pointed downward to the grave by which it stood.

"Men's courses will foreshadow certain ends, to which, if persevered
in, they must lead," said Scrooge.  "But if the courses be departed
from, the ends will change.  Say it is thus with what you show me!"

The Spirit was immovable as ever.

Scrooge crept toward it, trembling as he went; and following the
finger, read upon the stone of the neglected grave his own name,
"Ebenezer Scrooge."

"Am _I_ that man who lay upon the bed?" he cried, upon his knees.

The finger pointed from the grave to him, and back again.

"No, Spirit!  Oh, no, no!"

The finger still was there.

"Spirit!" he cried, tight clutching at its robe, "hear me!  I am not
the man I was.  I will not be the man I must have been but for this
intercourse.  Why show me this, if I am past all hope!"

For the first time the hand appeared to shake.

"Good Spirit," he pursued, as down upon the ground he fell before it:
"Your nature intercedes for me, and pities me.  Assure me that I yet
may change these shadows you have shown me, by an altered life!"

The kind hand trembled.

"I will honor Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the year.
I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future.  The Spirits of
all Three shall strive within me.  I will not shut out the lessons
that they teach.  Oh, tell me I may sponge away the writing on this
stone!"

In his agony, he caught the spectral hand.  It sought to free itself,
but he was strong in his entreaty, and detained it.  The Spirit,
stronger yet, repulsed him.

Holding up his hand in one last prayer to have his fate reversed, he
saw an alteration in the Phantom's hood and dress.  It shrank,
collapsed, and dwindled down into a bed-post.




STAVE FIVE

_The End of It_

Yes! and the bedpost was his own.  The bed was his own, the room was
his own.  Best and happiest of all, the Time before him was his own,
to make amends in!

"I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future!" Scrooge
repeated, as he scrambled out of bed.  "The Spirits of all Three
shall strive within me.  Oh, Jacob Marley!  Heaven, and the Christmas
Time be praised for this!  I say it on my knees, old Jacob, on my
knees!"

He was so fluttered and so glowing with his good intentions, that his
broken voice would scarcely answer to his call.  He had been sobbing
violently in his conflict with the Spirit, and his face was wet with
tears.

"They are not torn down," cried Scrooge, folding one of his
bed-curtains in his arms, "they are not torn down, rings and all.
They are here: I am here: the shadows of the things that would have
been may be dispelled.  They will be.  I know they will!"

His hands were busy with his garments all this time: turning them
inside out, putting them on upside down, tearing them, mislaying
them, making them parties to every kind of extravagance.

"I don't know what to do!" cried Scrooge, laughing and crying in the
same breath; and making a perfect Laoco√∂n of himself with his
stockings.  "I am as light as a feather, I am as happy as an angel, I
am as merry as a schoolboy.  I am as giddy as a drunken man.  A Merry
Christmas to everybody!  A Happy New Year to all the world.  Hallo
here!  Whoop!  Hallo!"

He had frisked into the sitting-room, and was now standing there:
perfectly winded.

"There's the saucepan that the gruel was in!" cried Scrooge, starting
off again, and frisking round the fireplace.  "There's the door, by
which the Ghost of Jacob Marley entered!  There's the corner where
the Ghost of Christmas Present sat!  There's the window where I saw
the wandering Spirits!  It's all right, it's all true, it all
happened.  Ha, ha, ha!"

Really, for a man who had been out of practise for so many years, it
was a splendid laugh, a most illustrious laugh.  The father of a
long, long line of brilliant laughs!

"I don't know what day of the month it is!" said Scrooge.  "I don't
know how long I've been among the Spirits.  I don't know anything.
I'm quite a baby.  Never mind.  I don't care.  I'd rather be a baby.
Hallo!  Whoop!  Hallo here!"

He was checked in his transports by the churches ringing out the
lustiest peals he had ever heard.  Clash, clang, hammer, ding, dong,
bell.  Bell, dong, ding, hammer, clang, clash!  Oh, glorious,
glorious!

Running to the window, he opened it, and put out his head.  No fog,
no mist; clear, bright, jovial, stirring, cold; cold, piping for the
blood to dance to; golden sunlight; heavenly sky; sweet fresh air;
merry bells.  Oh, glorious.  Glorious!

"What's to-day?" cried Scrooge, calling downward to a boy in Sunday
clothes, who perhaps had loitered in to look about him.

"Eh?" returned the boy, with all his might of wonder.

"What's to-day, my fine fellow?" said Scrooge.

"To-day!" replied the boy.  "Why, CHRISTMAS DAY."

"It's Christmas Day!" said Scrooge to himself.  "I haven't missed it.
The Spirits have done it all in one night.  They can do anything they
like.  Of course they can.  Of course they can.  Hallo, my fine
fellow!"

"Hallo!" returned the boy.

"Do you know the Poulterer's, in the next street but one, at the
corner?" Scrooge inquired.

"I should hope I did," replied the lad.

"An intelligent boy!" said Scrooge.  "A remarkable boy!  Do you know
whether they've sold the prize turkey that was hanging up there?  Not
the little prize turkey: the big one?"

"What, the one as big as me?" returned the boy.

"What a delightful boy!" said Scrooge.  "It's a pleasure to talk to
him.  Yes, my buck!"

"It's hanging there now," replied the boy.

"Is it?" said Scrooge.  "Go and buy it."

"Walk-_er_!" exclaimed the boy.

"No, no," said Scrooge, "I am in earnest.  Go and buy it, and tell
'em to bring it here, that I may give them the direction where to
take it.  Come back with the man, and I'll give you a shilling.  Come
back with him in less than five minutes, and I'll give you
half-a-crown!"

The boy was off like a shot.  He must have had a steady hand at a
trigger who could have got a shot off half so fast.

"I'll send it to Bob Cratchit's!" whispered Scrooge, rubbing his
hands, and splitting with a laugh.  "He shan't know who sends it.
It's twice the size of Tiny Tim.  Joe Miller never made such a joke
as sending it to Bob's will be!"

The hand in which he wrote the address was not a steady one, but
write it he did, somehow, and went downstairs to open the street
door, ready for the coming of the poulterer's man.  As he stood
there, waiting his arrival, the knocker caught his eye.

"I shall love it, as long as I live!" cried Scrooge, patting it with
his hand.  "I scarcely ever looked at it before.  What an honest
expression it has in its face!  It's a wonderful knocker!--Here's the
Turkey.  Hallo!  Whoop!  How are you!  Merry Christmas!"

It _was_ a Turkey!  He could never have stood upon his legs, that
bird.  He would have snapped 'em short off in a minute, like sticks
of sealing-wax.

"Why, it's impossible to carry that to Camden Town," said Scrooge.
"You must have a cab."

The chuckle with which he said this, and the chuckle with which he
paid for the turkey, and the chuckle with which he paid for the cab,
and the chuckle with which he recompensed the boy, were only to be
exceeded by the chuckle with which he sat down breathless in his
chair again, and chuckled till he cried.

Shaving was not an easy task, for his hand continued to shake very
much; and shaving requires attention, even when you don't dance while
you are at it.  But if he had cut the end of his nose off, he would
have put a piece of sticking-plaster over it, and been quite
satisfied.

He dressed himself "all in his best," and at last got out into the
streets.  The people were by this time pouring forth, as he had seen
them with the Ghost of Christmas Present; and walking with his hands
behind him, Scrooge regarded every one with a delighted smile.  He
looked so irresistibly pleasant, in a word, that three or four
good-humored fellows said: "Good-morning, sir!  A Merry Christmas to
you!"  And Scrooge said often afterward, that of all the blithe
sounds he had ever heard, those were the blithest in his ears.

He had not gone far, when coming on toward him he beheld the portly
gentleman who had walked into his counting-house the day before and
said: "Scrooge and Marley's, I believe?"  It sent a pang across his
heart to think how this old gentleman would look upon him when they
met; but he knew what path lay straight before him, and he took it.

"My dear sir," said Scrooge, quickening his pace, and taking the old
gentleman by both his hands.  "How do you do?  I hope you succeeded
yesterday.  It was very kind of you.  A Merry Christmas to you, sir!"

"Mr. Scrooge?"

"Yes," said Scrooge.  "That is my name, and I fear it may not be
pleasant to you.  Allow me to ask your pardon.  And will you have the
goodness"--here Scrooge whispered in his ear.

"Lord bless me!" cried the gentleman, as if his breath were gone.
"My dear Mr. Scrooge, are you serious?"

"If you please," said Scrooge.  "Not a farthing less.  A great many
back-payments are included in it, I assure you.  Will you do me that
favor?"

"My dear sir," said the other, shaking hands with him.  "I don't know
what to say to such munifi--"

"Don't say anything, please," retorted Scrooge.  "Come and see me.
Will you come and see me?"

"I will!" cried the old gentleman.  And it was clear he meant to do
it.

"Thank'ee," said Scrooge.  "I am much obliged to you.  I thank you
fifty times.  Bless you!"

He went to church, and walked about the streets, and watched the
people hurrying to and fro, and patted children on the head, and
questioned beggars, and looked down into the kitchens of houses, and
up to the windows; and found that everything could yield him
pleasure.  He had never dreamed that any walk--that anything--could
give him so much happiness.  In the afternoon, he turned his steps
toward his nephew's house.

He passed the door a dozen times, before he had the courage to go up
and knock.  But he made a dash, and did it:

"Is your master at home, my dear?" said Scrooge to the girl.  Nice
girl!  Very.

"Yes, sir."

"Where is he, my love?" said Scrooge.

"He's in the dining-room, sir, along with mistress.  I'll show you
upstairs, if you please."

"Thank'ee.  He knows me," said Scrooge, with his hand already on the
dining-room lock.  "I'll go in here, my dear."

He turned it gently, and sidled his face in, round the door.  They
were looking at the table (which was spread out in great array); for
these young housekeepers are always nervous on such points, and like
to see that everything is right.

"Fred!" said Scrooge.

Dear heart alive, how his niece by marriage started!  Scrooge had
forgotten, for the moment, about her sitting in the corner with the
footstool, or he wouldn't have done it, on any account.

"Why, bless my soul!" cried Fred, "who's that?"

"It's I.  Your uncle Scrooge.  I have come to dinner.  Will you let
me in, Fred?"

Let him in!  It is a mercy he didn't shake his arm off.  He was at
home in five minutes.  Nothing could be heartier.  His niece looked
just the same.  So did Topper when _he_ came.  So did the plump
sister, when _she_ came.  So did every one when _they_ came.
Wonderful party, wonderful games, wonderful unanimity, won-der-ful
happiness!

But he was early at the office next morning.  Oh, he was early there.
If he could only be there first, and catch Bob Cratchit coming late!
That was the thing he had set his heart upon.

And he did it; yes he did!  The clock struck nine.  No Bob.  A
quarter past.  No Bob.  He was full eighteen minutes and a half
behind his time.  Scrooge sat with his door wide open, that he might
see him come into the Tank.

His hat was off, before he opened the door; his comforter too.  He
was on his stool in a jiffy; driving away with his pen, as if he were
trying to overtake nine o'clock.

"Hallo!" growled Scrooge, in his accustomed voice as near as he could
feign it.  "What do you mean by coming here at this time of day?"

"I am very sorry, sir," said Bob.  "I am behind my time."

"You are?" repeated Scrooge.  "Yes.  I think you are.  Step this way,
sir, if you please."

"It's only once a year, sir," pleaded Bob, appearing from the Tank.
"It shall not be repeated.  I was making rather merry yesterday, sir."

"Now, I'll tell you what, my friend," said Scrooge, "I am not going
to stand this sort of thing any longer.  And therefore," he
continued, leaping from his stool, and giving Bob such a dig in the
waistcoat that he staggered back into the Tank again: "and therefore
I am about to raise your salary!"

Bob trembled, and got a little nearer to the ruler.  He had a
momentary idea of knocking Scrooge down with it; holding him; and
calling to the people in the court for help and a strait-waistcoat.

"A Merry Christmas, Bob!" said Scrooge, with an earnestness that
could not be mistaken, as he clapped him on the back.  "A merrier
Christmas, Bob, my good fellow, than I have given you for many a
year!  I'll raise your salary, and endeavor to assist your struggling
family, and we will discuss your affairs this very afternoon, over a
Christmas bowl of smoking bishop, Bob!  Make up the fires, and buy
another coal-scuttle before you dot another i, Bob Cratchit!"

Scrooge was better than his word.  He did it all, and infinitely
more; and to Tiny Tim, who did _not_ die, he was a second father.  He
became as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the
good old City knew, or any other good old city, town, or borough in
the good old world.  Some people laughed to see the alteration in
him, but he let them laugh, and little heeded them; for he was wise
enough to know that nothing ever happened on this globe, for good, at
which some people did not have their fill of laughter in the outset;
and knowing that such as these would be blind anyway, he thought it
quite as well that they should wrinkle up their eyes in grins, as
have the malady in less attractive forms.  His own heart laughed: and
that was quite enough for him.

He had no further intercourse with Spirits, but lived upon the Total
Abstinence Principle, ever afterward; and it was always said of him,
that he knew how to keep Christmas well, if any man alive possessed
the knowledge.  May that be truly said of us, and all of us!  And so,
as Tiny Tim observed, God Bless Us, Every One!



THE SPECTRE BRIDEGROOM

BY WASHINGTON IRVING

_"A torch-bearer in the great procession of English prose writers,"
Irving's style is based on a close study of Addison and the
"Spectator" models._

_"The Sketch-Book," from which this story is taken, has been often
pronounced the best book that came from his pen._



THE SPECTRE BRIDEGROOM

By WASHINGTON IRVING

A TRAVELER'S TALE*

* The erudite reader, well versed in good-for-nothing lore, will
perceive that the above Tale must have been suggested to the old
Swiss by a little French anecdote of a circumstance said to have
taken place at Paris.


  "He that supper for is dight,
  He lyes full cold, I trow, this night!
  Yestreen to chamber I him led,
  This night Gray-steel has made his bed!"
        --_Sir Eger, Sir Grahame_ and _Sir Gray-steel_

On the summit of one of the heights of the Odenwald, a wild and
romantic tract of Upper Germany that lies not far from the confluence
of the Maine and the Rhine, there stood, many, many years since, the
Castle of the Baron Von Landshort.  It is now quite fallen to decay,
and almost buried among beech trees and dark firs; above which,
however, its old watch-tower may still be seen struggling, like the
former possessor I have mentioned, to carry a high head, and look
down upon a neighboring country.

The Baron was a dry branch of the great family of Katzenellenbogen,*
and inherited the relics of the property and all the pride of his
ancestors.  Though the warlike disposition of his predecessors had
much impaired the family possessions, yet the Baron still endeavored
to keep up some show of former state.  The times were peaceable, and
the German nobles, in general, had abandoned their inconvenient old
castles, perched like eagles' nests among the mountains, and had
built more convenient residences in the valleys; still the Baron
remained proudly drawn up in his little fortress, cherishing with
hereditary inveteracy all the old family feuds; so that he was on ill
terms with some of his nearest neighbors, on account of disputes that
had happened between their great-great-grandfathers.


* _I.e., Cat's Elbow_--the name of a family of those parts, very
powerful in former times.  The appellation, we are told, was given in
compliment to a peerless dame of the family, celebrated for a fine
arm.


The Baron had but one child, a daughter; but Nature, when she grants
but one child, always compensates by making it a prodigy; and so it
was with the daughter of the Baron.  All the nurses, gossips, and
country cousins, assured her father that she had not her equal for
beauty in all Germany; and who should know better than they?  She
had, moreover, been brought up with great care, under the
superintendence of two maiden aunts, who had spent some years of
their early life at one of the little German courts, and were skilled
in all the branches of knowledge necessary to the education of a fine
lady.  Under their instructions, she became a miracle of
accomplishments.  By the time she was eighteen she could embroider to
admiration, and had worked whole histories of the saints in tapestry
with such strength of expression in their countenances that they
looked like so many souls in purgatory.  She could read without great
difficulty, and had spelled her way through several church legends,
and almost all the chivalric wonders of the Heldenbuch.  She had even
made considerable proficiency in writing, could sign her own name
without missing a letter, and so legibly that her aunts could read it
without spectacles.  She excelled in making little good-for-nothing
lady-like knickknacks of all kinds; was versed in the most abstruse
dancing of the day; played a number of airs on the harp and guitar;
and knew all the tender ballads of the Minnie-lieders by heart.

Her aunts, too, having been great flirts and coquettes in their
younger days, were admirably calculated to be vigilant guardians and
strict censors of the conduct of their niece; for there is no duenna
so rigidly prudent, and inexorably decorous, as a superannuated
coquette.  She was rarely suffered out of their sight; never went
beyond the domains of the castle, unless well attended, or, rather,
well watched; had continual lectures read to her about strict decorum
and implicit obedience; and, as to the men--pah! she was taught to
hold them at such distance and distrust that, unless properly
authorized, she would not have cast a glance upon the handsomest
cavalier in the world--no, not if he were even dying at her feet.

The good effects of this system were wonderfully apparent.  The young
lady was a pattern of docility and correctness.  While others were
wasting their sweetness in the glare of the world, and liable to be
plucked and thrown aside by every hand, she was coyly blooming into
fresh and lovely womanhood under the protection of those immaculate
spinsters, like a rose-bud blushing forth among guardian thorns.  Her
aunts looked upon her with pride and exultation, and vaunted that
though all the other young ladies in the world might go astray, yet,
thank Heaven, nothing of the kind could happen to the heiress of
Katzenellenbogen.

But however scantily the Baron Von Landshort might be provided with
children, his household was by no means a small one, for Providence
had enriched him with abundance of poor relations.  They, one and
all, possessed the affectionate disposition common to humble
relatives; were wonderfully attached to the Baron, and took every
possible occasion to come in swarms and enliven the castle.  All
family festivals were commemorated by these good people at the
Baron's expense; and when they were filled with good cheer, they
would declare that there was nothing on earth so delightful as these
family meetings, these jubilees of the heart.

The Baron, though a small man, had a large soul, and it swelled with
satisfaction at the consciousness of being the greatest man in the
little world about him.  He loved to tell long stories about the
stark old warriors whose portraits looked grimly down from the walls
around, and he found no listeners equal to those who fed at his
expense.  He was much given to the marvelous, and a firm believer in
all those supernatural tales with which every mountain and valley in
Germany abounds.  The faith of his guests even exceeded his own: they
listened to every tale of wonder with open eyes and mouth, and never
failed to be astonished, even though repeated for the hundredth time.
Thus lived the Baron Von Landshort, the oracle of his table, the
absolute monarch of his little territory, and happy, above all
things, in the persuasion that he was the wisest man of the age.

At the time of which my story treats there was a great family
gathering at the castle, on an affair of the utmost importance: it
was to receive the destined bridegroom of the Baron's daughter.  A
negotiation had been carried on between the father and an old
nobleman of Bavaria, to unite the dignity of their houses by the
marriage of their children.  The preliminaries had been conducted
with proper punctilio.  The young people were betrothed without
seeing each other, and the time was appointed for the marriage
ceremony.  The young Count Von Altenburg had been recalled from the
army for the purpose, and was actually on his way to the Baron's to
receive his bride.  Missives had even been received from him, from
Wurtzburg, where he was accidentally detained, mentioning the day and
hour when he might be expected to arrive.

The castle was in a tumult of preparation to give him a suitable
welcome.  The fair bride had been decked out with uncommon care.  The
two aunts had superintended her toilet, and quarreled the whole
morning about every article of her dress.  The young lady had taken
advantage of their contest to follow the bent of her own taste; and
fortunately it was a good one.  She looked as lovely as youthful
bridegroom could desire; and the flutter of expectation heightened
the lustre of her charms.

The suffusions that mantled her face and neck, the gentle heaving of
the bosom, the eye now and then lost in reverie, all betrayed the
soft tumult that was going on in her little heart.  The aunts were
continually hovering around her; for maiden aunts are apt to take
great interest in affairs of this nature: they were giving her a
world of staid counsel how to deport herself, what to say, and in
what manner to receive the expected lover.

The Baron was no less busied in preparations.  He had, in truth,
nothing exactly to do; but he was naturally a fuming, bustling little
man, and could not remain passive when all the world was in a hurry.
He worried from top to bottom of the castle, with an air of infinite
anxiety; he continually called the servants from their work to exhort
them to be diligent, and buzzed about every hall and chamber, as
idly, restless, and importunate as a bluebottle fly of a warm
summer's day.

In the meantime, the fatted calf had been killed; the forests had
rung with the clamor of the huntsmen; the kitchen was crowded with
good cheer; the cellars had yielded up whole oceans of _Rhein-wein_
and _Ferne-wein_, and even the great Heidelberg Tun had been laid
under contribution.  Everything was ready to receive the
distinguished guest with _Saus and Braus_ in the true spirit of
German hospitality--but the guest delayed to make his appearance.
Hour rolled after hour.  The sun that had poured his downward rays
upon the rich forests of the Odenwald, now just gleamed along the
summits of the mountains.  The Baron mounted the highest tower, and
strained his eyes in hopes of catching a distant sight of the Count
and his attendants.  Once he thought he beheld them; the sound of
horns came floating from the valley, prolonged by the mountain
echoes: a number of horsemen were seen far below, slowly advancing
along the road; but when they had nearly reached the foot of the
mountain they suddenly struck off in a different direction.  The last
ray of sunshine departed--the boats began to flit by in the
twilight--the road grew dimmer and dimmer to the view; and nothing
appeared stirring in it but now and then a peasant lagging homeward
from his labor.

While the old castle of Landshort was in this state of perplexity, a
very interesting scene was transacting in a different part of the
Odenwald.

The young Count Von Altenburg was tranquilly pursuing his route in
that sober jog-trot way in which a man travels toward matrimony when
his friends have taken all the trouble and uncertainty of courtship
off his hands, and a bride is waiting for him, as certainly as a
dinner, at the end of his journey.  He had encountered at Wurtzburg a
youthful companion in arms, with whom he had seen some service on the
frontiers: Herman Von Starkenfaust, one of the stoutest hands and
worthiest hearts of German chivalry, who was now returning from the
army.  His father's castle was not far distant from the old fortress
of Landshort, although a hereditary feud rendered the families
hostile and strangers to each other.

In the warm-hearted moment of recognition, the young friends related
all their past adventures and fortunes, and the Count gave the whole
history of his intended nuptials with a young lady whom he had never
seen, but of whose charms he had received the most enrapturing
descriptions.

As the route of the friends lay in the same direction, they agreed to
perform the rest of their journey together; and, that they might do
it more leisurely, set off from Wurtzburg at an early hour, the Count
having given directions for his retinue to follow and overtake him.

They beguiled their wayfaring with recollections of their military
scenes and adventures; but the Count was apt to be a little tedious,
now and then, about the reputed charms of his bride, and the felicity
that awaited him.

In this way they had entered among the mountains of the Odenwald, and
were traversing one of its most lonely and thickly wooded passes.  It
is well known that the forests of Germany have always been as much
infested with robbers as its castles by spectres; and, at this time,
the former were particularly numerous, from the hordes of disbanded
soldiers wandering about the country.  It will not appear
extraordinary, therefore, that the cavaliers were attacked by a gang
of these stragglers in the midst of the forest.  They defended
themselves with bravery, but were nearly overpowered when the Count's
retinue arrived to their assistance.  At sight of them the robbers
fled, but not until the Count had received a mortal wound.  He was
slowly and carefully conveyed back to the city of Wurtzburg, and a
friar summoned from a neighboring convent, who was famous for his
skill in administering to both soul and body.  But half of his skill
was superfluous; the moments of the unfortunate Count were numbered.

With his dying breath he entreated his friend to repair instantly to
the castle of Landshort, and explain the fatal cause of his not
keeping his appointment with his bride.  Though not the most ardent
of lovers, he was one of the most punctilious of men, and appeared
earnestly solicitous that this mission should be speedily and
courteously executed.  "Unless this is done," said he, "I shall not
sleep quietly in my grave!"  He repeated these last words with
peculiar solemnity.  A request, at a moment so impressive, admitted
no hesitation.  Starkenfaust endeavored to soothe him to calmness;
promised faithfully to execute his wish, and gave him his hand in
solemn pledge.  The dying man pressed it in acknowledgment, but soon
lapsed into delirium--raved about his bride--his engagements--his
plighted word; ordered his horse, that he might ride to the castle of
Landshort, and expired in the fancied act of vaulting into the saddle.

Starkenfaust bestowed a sigh and a soldier's tear on the untimely
fate of his comrade; and then pondered on the awkward mission he had
undertaken.  His heart was heavy, and his head perplexed; for he was
to present himself an unbidden guest among hostile people, and to
damp their festivity with tidings fatal to their hopes.  Still there
were certain whisperings of curiosity in his bosom to see this
far-famed beauty of Katzenellenbogen so cautiously shut up from the
world; for he was a passionate admirer of the sex, and there was a
dash of eccentricity and enterprise in his character that made him
fond of all singular adventure.

Previous to his departure, he made all due arrangements with the holy
fraternity of the convent for the funeral solemnities of his friend,
who was to be buried in the cathedral of Wurtzburg, near some of his
illustrious relatives; and the mourning retinue of the Count took
charge of his remains.

It is now high time that we should return to the ancient family of
Katzenellenbogen, who were impatient for their guest, and still more
for their dinner; and to the worthy little Baron, whom we left airing
himself on the watch-tower.

Night closed in, but still no guest arrived.  The Baron descended
from the tower in despair.  The banquet, which had been delayed from
hour to hour, could no longer be postponed.  The meats were already
overdone, the cook in an agony, and the whole household had the look
of a garrison that had been reduced by famine.  The Baron was obliged
reluctantly to give orders for the feast without the presence of the
guest.  All were seated at table, and just on the point of
commencing, when the sound of a horn from without the gate gave
notice of the approach of a stranger.  Another long blast filled the
old courts of the castle with its echoes, and was answered by the
warder from the walls.  The Baron hastened to receive his future
son-in-law.

The drawbridge had been let down, and the stranger was before the
gate.  He was a tall gallant cavalier, mounted on a black steed.  His
countenance was pale, but he had a beaming, romantic eye, and an air
of stately melancholy.  The Baron was a little mortified that he
should have come in this simple, solitary style.  His dignity for a
moment was ruffled, and he felt disposed to consider it a want of
proper respect for the important occasion, and the important family
with which he was to be connected.  He pacified himself, however,
with the conclusion that it must have been youthful impatience which
had induced him thus to spur on sooner than his attendants.

"I am sorry," said the stranger, "to break in upon you thus
unseasonably--"

Here the Baron interrupted him with a world of compliments and
greetings; for, to tell the truth, he prided himself upon his
courtesy and his eloquence.  The stranger attempted, once or twice,
to stem the torrent of words, but in vain; so he bowed his head and
suffered it to flow on.  By the time the Baron had come to a pause
they had reached the inner court of the castle; and the stranger was
again about to speak, when he was once more interrupted by the
appearance of the female part of the family, leading forth the
shrinking and blushing bride.  He gazed on her for a moment as one
entranced; it seemed as if his whole soul beamed forth in the gaze,
and rested upon that lovely form.  One of the maiden aunts whispered
something in her ear; she made an effort to speak; her moist blue eye
was timidly raised, gave a shy glance of inquiry on the stranger, and
was cast again to the ground.  The words died away; but there was a
sweet smile playing about her lips, and a soft dimpling of the cheek,
that showed her glance had not been unsatisfactory.  It was
impossible for a girl of the fond age of eighteen, highly predisposed
for love and matrimony, not to be pleased with so gallant a cavalier.

The late hour at which the guest had arrived left no time for parley.
The Baron was peremptory, and deferred all particular conversation
until the morning, and led the way to the untasted banquet.

It was served up in the great hall of the castle.  Around the walls
hung the hard-favored portraits of the heroes of the house of
Katzenellenbogen, and the trophies which they had gained in the field
and in the chase.  Hacked corselets, splintered jousting spears, and
tattered banners, were mingled with the spoils of sylvan warfare: the
jaws of the wolf, and the tusks of the boar, grinned horribly among
crossbows and battle-axes, and a huge pair of antlers branched
immediately over the head of the youthful bridegroom.

The cavalier took but little notice of the company or the
entertainment.  He scarcely tasted the banquet, but seemed absorbed
in admiration of his bride.  He conversed in a low tone, that could
not be overheard--for the language of love is never loud; but where
is the female ear so dull that it can not catch the softest whisper
of the lover?  There was a mingled tenderness and gravity in his
manner that appeared to have a powerful effect upon the young lady.
Her color came and went, as she listened with deep attention.  Now
and then she made some blushing reply, and when his eye was turned
away she would steal a sidelong glance at his romantic countenance,
and heave a gentle sigh of tender happiness.  It was evident that the
young couple were completely enamored.  The aunts, who were deeply
versed in the mysteries of the heart, declared that they had fallen
in love with each other at first sight.

The feast went on merrily, or at least noisily, for the guests were
all blessed with those keen appetites that attend upon light purses
and mountain air.  The Baron told his best and longest stories, and
never had he told them so well, or with such great effect.  If there
was anything marvelous, his auditors were lost in astonishment; and
if anything facetious, they were sure to laugh exactly in the right
place.  The Baron, it is true, like most great men, was too dignified
to utter any joke but a dull one: it was always enforced, however, by
a bumper of excellent Hoch-heimer; and even a dull joke, at one's own
table, served up with jolly old wine, is irresistible.  Many good
things were said by poorer and keener wits that would not bear
repeating, except on similar occasions; many sly speeches whispered
in ladies' ears that almost convulsed them with suppressed laughter;
and a song or two roared out by a poor, but merry and broad-faced
cousin of the Baron, that absolutely made the maiden aunts hold up
their fans.

Amid all this revelry, the stranger-guest maintained a most singular
and unseasonable gravity.  His countenance assumed a deeper cast of
dejection as the evening advanced, and, strange as it may appear,
even the Baron's jokes seemed only to render him the more melancholy.
At times he was lost in thought, and at times there was a perturbed
and restless wandering of the eye that bespoke a mind but ill at
ease.  His conversation with the bride became more and more earnest
and mysterious.  Lowering clouds began to steal over the fair
serenity of her brow, and tremors to run through her tender frame.

All this could not escape the notice of the company.  Their gaiety
was chilled by the unaccountable gloom of the bridegroom; their
spirits were infected; whispers and glances were interchanged,
accompanied by shrugs and dubious shakes of the head.  The song and
the laugh grew less and less frequent: there were dreary pauses in
the conversation, which were at length succeeded by wild tales, and
supernatural legends.  One dismal story produced another still more
dismal, and the Baron nearly frightened some of the ladies into
hysterics with the history of the goblin horseman that carried away
the fair Leonora--a dreadful, but true story, which has since been
put into excellent verse, and is read and believed by all the world.

The bridegroom listened to this tale with profound attention.  He
kept his eyes steadily fixed on the Baron, and, as the story drew to
a close, began gradually to rise from his seat, growing taller and
taller, until, in the Baron's entranced eye, he seemed almost to
tower into a giant.  The moment the tale was finished, he heaved a
deep sigh, and took a solemn farewell of the company.  They were all
amazement.  The Baron was perfectly thunderstruck.

"What! going to leave the castle at midnight?  Why, everything was
prepared for his reception; a chamber was ready for him if he wished
to retire."

The stranger shook his head mournfully and mysteriously: "I must lay
my head in a different chamber to-night!"

There was something in this reply, and the tone in which it was
uttered, that made the Baron's heart misgive him; but he rallied his
forces, and repeated his hospitable entreaties.  The stranger shook
his head silently, but positively, at every offer; and, waving his
farewell to the company, stalked slowly out of the hall.  The maiden
aunts were absolutely petrified--the bride hung her head, and a tear
stole to her eye.

The Baron followed the stranger to the great court of the castle,
where the black charger stood pawing the earth and snorting with
impatience.  When they had reached the portal, whose deep archway was
dimly lighted by a cresset, the stranger paused, and addressed the
Baron in a hollow tone of voice, which the vaulted roof rendered
still more sepulchral.  "Now that we are alone," said he, "I will
impart to you the reason of my going.  I have a solemn, an
indispensable engagement--"

"Why," said the Baron, "can not you send some one in your place?"

"It admits of no substitute--I must attend it in person--I must away
to Wurtzburg cathedral--"

"Ay," said the Baron, plucking up spirit, "but not until
to-morrow--to-morrow you shall take your bride there."

"No! no!" replied the stranger, with tenfold solemnity, "my
engagement is with no bride--the worms! the worms expect me!  I am a
dead man--I have been slain by robbers--my body lies at Wurtzburg--at
midnight I am to be buried--the grave is waiting for me--I must keep
my appointment!"

He sprang on his black charger, dashed over the drawbridge, and the
clattering of his horse's hoofs was lost in the whistling of the
night-blast.

The Baron returned to the hall in the utmost consternation, and
related what had passed.  Two ladies fainted outright; others
sickened at the idea of having banqueted with a spectre.  It was the
opinion of some that this might be the wild huntsman famous in German
legend.  Some talked of mountain sprites, of wood-demons, and of
other supernatural beings, with which the good people of Germany have
been so grievously harassed since time immemorial.  One of the poor
relations ventured to suggest that it might be some sportive evasion
of the young cavalier, and that the very gloominess of the caprice
seemed to accord with so melancholy a personage.  This, however, drew
on him the indignation of the whole company, and especially of the
Baron, who looked upon him as little better than an infidel; so that
he was fain to abjure his heresy as speedily as possible, and come
into the faith of the true believers.

But, whatever may have been the doubts entertained, they were
completely put to an end by the arrival, next day, of regular
missives confirming the intelligence of the young Count's murder, and
his interment in Wurtzburg cathedral.

The dismay at the castle may well be imagined.  The Baron shut
himself up in his chamber.  The guests who had come to rejoice with
him could not think of abandoning him in his distress.  They wandered
about the courts, or collected in groups in the hall, shaking their
heads and shrugging their shoulders at the troubles of so good a man;
and sat longer than ever at table, and ate and drank more stoutly
than ever, by way of keeping up their spirits.  But the situation of
the widowed bride was the most pitiable.  To have lost a husband
before she had even embraced him--and such a husband! if the very
spectre could be so gracious and noble, what must have been the
living man?  She filled the house with lamentations.

On the night of the second day of her widowhood, she had retired to
her chamber, accompanied by one of her aunts, who insisted on
sleeping with her.  The aunt, who was one of the best tellers of
ghost stories in all Germany, had just been recounting one of her
longest, and had fallen asleep in the very midst of it.  The chamber
was remote, and overlooked a small garden.  The niece lay pensively
gazing at the beams of the rising moon, as they trembled on the
leaves of an aspen tree before the lattice.  The castle clock had
just tolled midnight, when a soft strain of music stole up from the
garden.  She rose hastily from her bed and stepped lightly to the
window.  A tall figure stood among the shadows of the trees.  As it
raised its head, a beam of moonlight fell upon the countenance.
Heaven and earth! she beheld the Spectre Bridegroom!  A loud shriek
at that moment burst upon her ear, and her aunt, who had been
awakened by the music, and had followed her silently to the window,
fell into her arms.  When she looked again, the spectre had
disappeared.

Of the two females, the aunt now required the most soothing, for she
was perfectly beside herself with terror.  As to the young lady,
there was something, even in the spectre of her lover, that seemed
endearing.  There was still the semblance of manly beauty; and though
the shadow of a man is but little calculated to satisfy the
affections of a love-sick girl, yet, where the substance is not to be
had, even that is consoling.  The aunt declared she would never sleep
in that chamber again; the niece, for once, was refractory, and
declared as strongly that she would sleep in no other in the castle:
the consequence was that she had to sleep in it alone; but she drew a
promise from her aunt not to relate the story of the spectre, lest
she should be denied the only melancholy pleasure left her on
earth--that of inhabiting the chamber over which the guardian shade
of her lover kept its nightly vigils.

How long the good old lady would have observed this promise is
uncertain, for she dearly loved to talk of the marvelous, and there
is a triumph in being the first to tell a frightful story; it is,
however, still quoted in the neighborhood, as a memorable instance of
female secrecy, that she kept it to herself for a whole week; when
she was suddenly absolved from all further restraint by intelligence
brought to the breakfast-table one morning that the young lady was
not to be found.  Her room was empty--the bed had not been slept
in--the window was open--and the bird had flown!

The astonishment and concern with which the intelligence was received
can only be imagined by those who have witnessed the agitation which
the mishaps of a great man cause among his friends.  Even the poor
relations paused for a moment from the indefatigable labors of the
trencher; when the aunt, who had at first been struck speechless,
wrung her hands and shrieked out, "The goblin! the goblin!  She's
carried away by the goblin!"

In a few words she related the fearful scene of the garden, and
concluded that the spectre must have carried off his bride.  Two of
the domestics corroborated the opinion, for they had heard the
clattering of a horse's hoofs down the mountain about midnight, and
had no doubt that it was the spectre on his black charger, bearing
her away to the tomb.  All present were struck with the direful
probability; for events of the kind are extremely common in Germany,
as many well-authenticated histories bear witness.

What a lamentable situation was that of the poor Baron!  What a
heartrending dilemma for a fond father, and a member of the great
family of Katzenellenbogen!  His only daughter had either been rapt
away to the grave, or he was to have some wood-demon for a
son-in-law, and, perchance, a troop of goblin grandchildren.  As
usual, he was completely bewildered, and all the castle in an uproar.
The men were ordered to take horse and scour every road and path and
glen of the Odenwald.  The Baron himself had just drawn on his
jack-boots, girded on his sword, and was about to mount his steed to
sally forth on the doubtful quest, when he was brought to a pause by
a new apparition.  A lady was seen approaching the castle, mounted on
a palfrey attended by a cavalier on horseback.  She galloped up to
the gate, sprang from her horse, and falling at the Baron's feet,
embraced his knees.  It was his lost daughter, and her companion--the
Spectre Bridegroom!  The Baron was astounded.  He looked at his
daughter, then at the spectre, and almost doubted the evidence of his
senses.  The latter, too, was wonderfully improved in his appearance,
since his visit to the world of spirits.  His dress was splendid, and
set off a noble figure of manly symmetry.  He was no longer pale and
melancholy.  His fine countenance was flushed with the glow of youth,
and joy rioted in his large dark eye.

The mystery was soon cleared up.  The cavalier (for, in truth, as you
must have known all the while, he was no goblin) announced himself as
Sir Herman Von Starkenfaust.  He related his adventure with the young
Count.  He told how he had hastened to the castle to deliver the
unwelcome tidings, but that the eloquence of the Baron had
interrupted him in every attempt to tell his tale.  How the sight of
the bride had completely captivated him, and that to pass a few hours
near her he had tacitly suffered the mistake to continue.  How he had
been sorely perplexed in what way to make a decent retreat, until the
Baron's goblin stories had suggested his eccentric exit.  How,
fearing the feudal hostility of the family, he had repeated his
visits by stealth--had haunted the garden beneath the young lady's
window--had wooed--had won--had borne away in triumph--and, in a
word, had wedded the fair.

Under any other circumstances the Baron would have been inflexible,
for he was tenacious of paternal authority and devoutly obstinate in
all family feuds; but he loved his daughter; he had lamented her as
lost; he rejoiced to find her still alive; and, though her husband
was of a hostile house, yet, thank Heaven, he was not a goblin.
There was something, it must be acknowledged, that did not exactly
accord with his notions of strict veracity, in the joke the knight
had passed upon him of his being a dead man; but several old friends
present, who had served in the wars, assured him that every stratagem
was excusable in love, and that the cavalier was entitled to especial
privilege, having lately served as a trooper.

Matters, therefore, were happily arranged.  The Baron pardoned the
young couple on the spot.  The revels at the castle were resumed.
The poor relations overwhelmed this new member of the family with
loving-kindness; he was so gallant, so generous--and so rich.  The
aunts, it is true, were somewhat scandalized that their system of
strict seclusion, and passive obedience, should be so badly
exemplified, but attributed it all to their negligence in not having
the windows grated.  One of them was particularly mortified at having
her marvelous story marred, and that the only spectre she had ever
seen should turn out a counterfeit; but the niece seemed perfectly
happy at having found him substantial flesh and blood--and so the
story ends.




THE MYSTERIOUS SKETCH

BY ERCKMANN--CHATRIAN

_Emile Erckmann (born 1822, died 1899) and Alexandre Chatrian (born
1826, died 1890), natives of Alsace-Lorraine, formed a literary
partnership in 1847 and wrote many charming novels and plays which
attained a great vogue.  These, appearing under the signature of
Erckmann-Chatrian, were supposed to be the productions of a single
writer until 1863, when the collaboration was announced.  It is said
that their first stories were rejected by all the newspapers of
Paris._

_"The Mysterious Sketch" is from "Les Contes Fantastiques."_



THE MYSTERIOUS SKETCH

By ERCKMANN--CHATRIAN


I

Opposite the chapel of Saint Sebalt in Nuremberg, at the corner of
Trabaus Street, there stands a little tavern, tall and narrow, with a
toothed gable and dusty windows, whose roof is surmounted by a
plaster Virgin.  It was there that I spent the unhappiest days of my
life.  I had gone to Nuremberg to study the old German masters; but
in default of ready money, I had to paint portraits--and such
portraits!  Fat old women with their cats on their laps, big-wigged
aldermen, burgomasters in three-cornered hats--all horribly bright
with ochre and vermilion.  From portraits I descended to sketches,
and from sketches to silhouettes.

Nothing is more annoying than to have your landlord come to you every
day with pinched lips, shrill voice, and impudent manner to say:
"Well, sir, how soon are you going to pay me?  Do you know how much
your bill is?  No; that doesn't worry you!  You eat, drink, and sleep
calmly enough.  God feeds the sparrows.  Your bill now amounts to two
hundred florins and ten kreutzers--it is not worth talking about."

Those who have not heard any one talk in this way can form no idea of
it; love of art, imagination, and the sacred enthusiasm for the
beautiful are blasted by the breath of such an attack.  You become
awkward and timid; all your energy evaporates, as well as your
feeling of personal dignity, and you bow respectfully at a distance
to the burgomaster Schneegans.

One night, not having a sou, as usual, and threatened with
imprisonment by this worthy Mister Rap, I determined to make him a
bankrupt by cutting my throat.  Seated on my narrow bed, opposite the
window, in this agreeable mood, I gave myself up to a thousand
philosophical reflections, more or less comforting.

"What is man?" I asked myself.  "An omnivorous animal; his jaws,
provided with canines, incisors, and molars, prove it.  The canines
are made to tear meat; the incisors to bite fruits; and the molars to
masticate, grind and triturate animal and vegetable substances that
are pleasant to smell and to taste.  But when he has nothing to
masticate, this being is an absurdity in Nature, a superfluity, a
fifth wheel to the coach."

Such were my reflections.  I dared not open my razor for fear that
the invincible force of my logic would inspire me with the courage to
make an end of it all.  After having argued so finely, I blew out my
candle, postponing the sequel till the morrow.

That abominable Rap had completely stupefied me.  I could do nothing
but silhouettes, and my sole desire was to have some money to rid
myself of his odious presence.  But on this night a singular change
came over my mind.  I awoke about one o'clock--I lit my lamp, and,
enveloping myself in my gray gabardine, I drew upon the paper a rapid
sketch after the Dutch school--something strange and bizarre, which
had not the slightest resemblance to my ordinary conceptions.

Imagine a dreary courtyard enclosed by high dilapidated walls.  These
walls are furnished with hooks, seven or eight feet from the ground.
You see, at a glance, that it is a butchery.

On the left, there extends a lattice structure; you perceive through
it a quartered beef suspended from the roof by enormous pulleys.
Great pools of blood run over the flagstones and unite in a ditch
full of refuse.

The light falls from above, between the chimneys where the
weathercocks stand out from a bit of the sky the size of your hand,
and the roofs of the neighboring houses throw bold shadows from story
to story.

At the back of this place is a shed, beneath the shed a pile of wood,
and upon the pile of wood some ladders, a few bundles of straw, some
coils of rope, a chicken-coop, and an old dilapidated rabbit-hutch.

How did these heterogeneous details suggest themselves to my
imagination?  I don't know; I had no reminiscences, and yet every
stroke of the pencil seemed the result of observation, and strange
because it was all so true.  Nothing was lacking.

But on the right, one corner of the sketch remained a blank.  I did
not know what to put there....  Something suddenly seemed to writhe
there, to move!  Then I saw a foot, the sole of a foot.
Notwithstanding this improbable position, I followed my inspiration
without reference to my own criticism.  This foot was joined to a
leg--over this leg, stretched out with effort, there soon floated the
skirt of a dress.  In short, there appeared by degrees, an old woman,
pale, disheveled, and wasted, thrown down at the side of a well, and
struggling to free herself from a hand that clutched at her throat.

It was a murder scene that I was drawing.  The pencil fell from my
hand.

This woman, in the boldest attitude, with her thighs bent on the curb
of the well, her face contracted by terror, and her two hands
grasping the murderer's arm, frightened me.  I could not look at her.
But the man--he, the person to whom that arm belonged--I could not
see him.  It was impossible for me to finish the sketch.

"I am tired," I said, my forehead dripping with perspiration; "there
is only this figure to do; I will finish it to-morrow.  It will be
easy then."

And I went to bed again, thoroughly frightened by my vision.

The next morning, I got up very early.  I was dressing in order to
resume my interrupted work, when two little knocks were heard on my
door.

"Come in!"

The door opened.  An old man, tall, thin, and dressed in black,
appeared on the threshold.  This man's face, his eyes set close
together and his large nose like the beak of an eagle, surmounted by
a high bony forehead, had something severe about it.  He bowed to me
gravely.

"Mister Christian V√©nius, the painter?" said he.

"That is my name, sir."

He bowed again, adding:

"The Baron Frederick Van Spreckdal."

The appearance of the rich amateur, Van Spreckdal, judge of the
criminal court, in my poor lodging, greatly disturbed me.  I could
not help throwing a stealthy glance at my old worm-eaten furniture,
my damp hangings and my dusty floor.  I felt humiliated by such
dilapidation; but Van Spreckdal did not seem to take any account of
these details; and sitting down at my little table:

"Mister V√©nius," he resumed, "I come--"  But at this instant his
glance fell upon the unfinished sketch--he did not finish his phrase.

I was sitting on the edge of my little bed; and the sudden attention
that this personage bestowed upon one of my productions made my heart
beat with an indefinable apprehension.

At the end of a minute, Van Spreckdal lifted his head:

"Are you the author of that sketch?" he asked me with an intent look.

"Yes, sir."

"What is the price of it?"

"I never sell my sketches.  It is the plan for a picture."

"Ah!" said he, picking up the paper with the tips of his long yellow
fingers.

He took a lens from his waistcoat pocket and began to study the
design in silence.

The sun was now shining obliquely into the garret.  Van Spreckdal
never said a word; the hook of his immense nose increased, his heavy
eyebrows contracted, and his long pointed chin took a turn upward,
making a thousand little wrinkles in his long, thin cheeks.  The
silence was so profound that I could distinctly hear the plaintive
buzzing of a fly that had been caught in a spider's web.

"And the dimensions of this picture, Mister V√©nius," he said without
looking at me.

"Three feet by four."

"The price?"

"Fifty ducats."

Van Spreckdal laid the sketch on the table, and drew from his pocket
a large purse of green silk shaped like a pear; he drew the rings of
it--

"Fifty ducats," said he, "here they are."

I was simply dazzled.

The Baron rose and bowed to me, and I heard his big ivory-headed cane
resounding on each step until he reached the bottom of the stairs.
Then, recovering from my stupor, I suddenly remembered that I had not
thanked him, and I flew down the five flights like lightning; but
when I reached the bottom, I looked to the right and left; the street
was deserted.

"Well!" I said, "this is strange."

And I went upstairs again all out of breath.



II

The surprising way in which Van Spreckdal had appeared to me threw me
into a deep wonderment.  "Yesterday," I said to myself, as I
contemplated the pile of ducats glittering in the sun, "yesterday I
formed the wicked intention of cutting my throat, all for the want of
a few miserable florins, and now to-day Fortune has showered them
from the clouds.  Indeed it was fortunate that I did not open my
razor; and, if the same temptation ever comes to me again, I will
take care to wait until the morrow."

After making these judicious reflections, I sat down to finish the
sketch; four strokes of the pencil and it would be finished.  But
here an incomprehensible difficulty awaited me.  It was impossible
for me to make those four sweeps of the pencil; I had lost the thread
of my inspiration, and the mysterious personage no longer stood out
in my brain.  I tried in vain to evoke him, to sketch him, and to
recover him; he no longer accorded with the surroundings than with a
figure by Raphael in a Teniers inn-kitchen.  I broke out into a
profuse perspiration.

At this moment, Rap opened the door without knocking, according to
his praiseworthy custom.  His eyes fell upon my pile of ducats and in
a shrill voice he cried:

"Eh! eh! so I catch you.  Will you still persist in telling me, Mr.
Painter, that you have no money?"

And his hooked fingers advanced with that nervous trembling that the
sight of gold always produces in a miser.

For a few seconds I was stupefied.

The memory of all the indignities that this individual had inflicted
upon me, his covetous look, and his impudent smile exasperated me.
With a single bound, I caught hold of him, and pushed him out of the
room, slamming the door in his face.

This was done with the crack and rapidity of a spring snuff-box.

But from outside the old usurer screamed like an eagle:

"My money, you thief, my money!"

The lodgers come out of their rooms, asking:

"What is the matter?  What has happened?"

I opened the door suddenly and quickly gave Mister Rap a kick in the
spine that sent him rolling down more than twenty steps.

"That's what's the matter!" I cried, quite beside myself.  Then I
shut the door and bolted it, while bursts of laughter from the
neighbors greeted Mister Rap in the passage.

I was satisfied with myself; I rubbed my hands together.  This
adventure had put new life into me; I resumed my work, and was about
to finish the sketch when I heard an unusual noise.

Butts of muskets were grounded on the pavement.  I looked out of my
window and saw three soldiers in full uniform with grounded arms in
front of my door.

I said to myself in my terror: "Can it be that that scoundrel of a
Rap has had any bones broken?"

And here is the strange peculiarity of the human mind: I, who the
night before had wanted to cut my own throat, shook from head to
foot, thinking that I might well be hanged if Rap were dead.

The stairway was filled with confused noises.  It was an ascending
flood of heavy footsteps, clanking arms, and short syllables.

Suddenly somebody tried to open my door.  It was shut.

Then there was a general clamor.

"In the name of the law--open!"

I arose, trembling and weak in the knees.

"Open!" the same voice repeated.

I thought to escape over the roofs; but I had hardly put my head out
of the little snuff-box window, when I drew back, seized with
vertigo.  I saw in a flash all the windows below with their shining
panes, their flower-pots, their birdcages, and their gratings.
Lower, the balcony; still lower, the street lamp; still lower again,
the sign of the "Red Cask" framed in iron-work; and, finally, three
glittering bayonets, only awaiting my fall to run me through the body
from the sole of my foot to the crown of my head.  On the roof of the
opposite house a tortoise-shell cat was crouching behind a chimney,
watching a band of sparrows fighting and scolding in the gutter.

One can not imagine to what clearness, intensity, and rapidity the
human eye acquires when stimulated by fear.

At the third summons I heard:

"Open, or we shall force it!"

Seeing that flight was impossible, I staggered to the door and drew
the bolt.

Two hands immediately fell upon my collar.  A dumpy, little man,
smelling of wine, said:

"I arrest you!"

He wore a bottle-green redingote, buttoned to the chin, and a
stovepipe hat.  He had large brown whiskers, rings on every finger,
and was named Passauf.

He was the chief of police.

Five bull-dogs with flat caps, noses like pistols, and lower jaws
turning upward, observed me from outside.

"What do you want?" I asked Passauf.

"Come downstairs," he cried roughly, as he gave a sign to one of his
men to seize me.

This man took hold of me, more dead than alive, while several other
men turned my room upside down.

I went downstairs supported by the arms like a person in the last
stages of consumption--with hair disheveled and stumbling at every
step.

They thrust me into a cab between two strong fellows, who charitably
let me see the ends of their clubs, held to their wrists by a leather
string--and then the carriage started off.

I heard behind us the feet of all the urchins of the town.

"What have I done?" I asked one of my keepers.

He looked at the other with a strange smile and said:

"Hans--he asks what he has done!"

That smile froze my blood.

Soon a deep shadow enveloped the carriage; the horses' hoofs
resounded under an archway.  We were entering the Raspelhaus.  Of
this place one might say:

  "Dans cet antre,
  Je vois fort bien comme l'on entre,
  Et ne vois point comme on en sort."


All is not rose-colored in this world; from the claws of Rap I fell
into a dungeon, from which very few poor devils have a chance to
escape.

Large dark courtyards and rows of windows like a hospital, and
furnished with gratings; not a sprig of verdure, not a festoon of
ivy, not even a weathercock in perspective--such was my new lodging.
It was enough to make one tear his hair out by the roots.

The police officers, accompanied by the jailer, took me temporarily
to a lock-up.

The jailer, if I remember rightly, was named Kasper Schl√ºssel; with
his gray, woolen cap, his pipe between his teeth, and his bunch of
keys at his belt, he reminded me of the Owl-God of the Caribs.  He
had the same golden yellow eyes, that see in the dark, a nose like a
comma, and a neck that was sunk between the shoulders.

Schl√ºssel shut me up as calmly as one locks up his socks in a
cupboard, while thinking of something else.  As for me, I stood for
more than ten minutes with my hands behind my back and my head bowed.
At the end of that time I made the following reflection: "When
falling, Rap cried out, 'I am assassinated,' but he did not say by
whom.  I will say it was my neighbor, the old merchant with the
spectacles: he will be hanged in my place."

This idea comforted my heart, and I drew a long breath.  Then I
looked about my prison.  It seemed to have been newly whitewashed,
and the walls were bare of designs, except in one corner, where a
gallows had been crudely sketched by my predecessor.  The light was
admitted through a bull's-eye about nine or ten feet from the floor;
the furniture consisted of a bundle of straw and a tub.

I sat down upon the straw with my hands around my knees in deep
despondency.  It was with great difficulty that I could think
clearly; but suddenly imagining that Rap, before dying, had denounced
me, my legs began to tingle, and I jumped up coughing, as if the
hempen cord were already tightening around my neck.

At the same moment, I heard Schl√ºssel walking down the corridor; he
opened the lock-up, and told me to follow him.  He was still
accompanied by the two officers, so I fell into step resolutely.

We walked down long galleries, lighted at intervals by small windows
from within.  Behind a grating I saw the famous Jic-Jack, who was
going to be executed on the morrow.  He had on a straitjacket and
sang out in a raucous voice:

"_Je suis le roi de ces montagnes._"

Seeing me, he called out:

"Eh! comrade!  I'll keep a place for you at my right."

The two police officers and the Owl-God looked at each other and
smiled, while I felt the goose-flesh creep down the whole length of
my back.



III

Schl√ºssel shoved me into a large and very dreary hall, with benches
arranged in a semicircle.  The appearance of this deserted hall, with
its two high grated windows, and its Christ carved in old brown oak
with His arms extended and His head sorrowfully inclined upon His
shoulder, inspired me with I do not know what kind of religious fear
that accorded with my actual situation.

All my ideas of false accusation disappeared, and my lips tremblingly
murmured a prayer.

I had not prayed for a long time; but misfortune always brings us to
thoughts of submission.  Man is so little in himself!

Opposite me, on an elevated seat, two men were sitting, with their
backs to the light, and consequently their faces were in shadow.
However, I recognized Van Spreckdal by his acquiline profile,
illuminated by an oblique reflection from the window.  The other
person was fat, he had round, chubby cheeks and short hands, and he
wore a robe, like Van Spreckdal.

Below was the clerk of the court, Conrad; he was writing at a low
table and was tickling the tip of his ear with the feather-end of his
pen.  When I entered, he stopped to look at me curiously.

They made me sit down, and Van Spreckdal, raising his voice, said to
me:

"Christian V√©nius, where did you get this sketch?"

He showed me the nocturnal sketch which was then in his possession.
It was handed to me.  After having examined it, I replied:

"I am the author of it."

A long silence followed; the clerk of the court, Conrad, wrote down
my reply.  I heard his pen scratch over the paper, and I thought:
"Why did they ask me that question?  That has nothing to do with the
kick I gave Rap in the back."

"You are the author of it?" asked Van Spreckdal.  "What is the
subject?"

"It is a subject of pure fancy."

"You have not copied the details from some spot?"

"No, sir; I imagined it all."

"Accused Christian," said the judge in a severe tone, "I ask you to
reflect.  Do not lie."

"I have spoken the truth."

"Write that down, clerk," said Van Spreckdal.

The pen scratched again.

"And this woman," continued the judge--"this woman who is being
murdered at the side of the well--did you imagine her also?"

"Certainly."

"You have never seen her?"

"Never."

Van Spreckdal rose indignantly; then, sitting down again, he seemed
to consult his companion in a low voice.

These two dark profiles silhouetted against the brightness of the
window, and the three men standing behind me, the silence in the
hall--everything made me shiver.

"What do you want with me?  What have I done?" I murmured.

Suddenly Van Spreckdal said to my guardians:

"You can take the prisoner back to the carriage; we will go to
Metzerstrasse."

Then, addressing me:

"Christian V√©nius," he cried, "you are in a deplorable situation.
Collect your thoughts and remember that if the law of men is
inflexible, there still remains for you the mercy of God.  This you
can merit by confessing your crime."

These words stunned me like a blow from a hammer.  I fell back with
extended arms, crying:

"Ah! what a terrible dream!"

And I fainted.

When I regained consciousness, the carriage was rolling slowly down
the street; another one preceded us.  The two officers were always
with me.  One of them on the way offered a pinch of snuff to his
companion; mechanically I reached out my hand toward the snuff-box,
but he withdrew it quickly.

My cheeks reddened with shame, and I turned away my head to conceal
my emotion.

"If you look outside," said the man with the snuff-box, "we shall be
obliged to put handcuffs on you."

"May the devil strangle you, you infernal scoundrel!" I said to
myself.  And as the carriage now stopped, one of them got out, while
the other held me by the collar; then, seeing that his comrade was
ready to receive me, he pushed me rudely to him.

These infinite precautions to hold possession of my person boded no
good; but I was far from predicting the seriousness of the accusation
that hung over my head until an alarming circumstance opened my eyes
and threw me into despair.

They pushed me along a low alley, the pavement of which was unequal
and broken; along the wall there ran a yellowish ooze, exhaling a
fetid odor.  I walked down this dark place with the two men behind
me.  A little further there appeared the chiaroscuro of an interior
courtyard.

I grew more and more terror-stricken as I advanced.  It was no
natural feeling: it was a poignant anxiety, outside of nature--like
the nightmare.  I recoiled instinctively at each step.

"Go on!" cried one of the policemen, laying his hand on my shoulder;
"go on!"

But what was my astonishment when, at the end of the passage, I saw
the courtyard that I had drawn the night before, with its walls
furnished with hooks, its rubbish-heap of old iron, its
chicken-coops, and its rabbit-hutch.  Not a dormer window, high or
low, not a broken pane, not the slightest detail had been omitted.

I was thunderstruck by this strange revelation.

Near the well were the two judges, Van Spreckdal and Richter.  At
their feet lay the old woman extended on her back, her long, thin,
gray hair, her blue face, her eyes wide open, and her tongue between
her teeth.

It was a horrible spectacle!

"Well," said Van Spreckdal, with solemn accents, "what have you to
say?"

I did not reply.

"Do you remember having thrown this woman, Theresa Becker, into this
well, after having strangled her to rob her of her money."

"No," I cried, "no!  I do not know this woman; I never saw her
before.  May God help me!"

"That will do," he replied in a dry voice.  And without saying
another word he went out with his companion.

The officers now believed they had best put handcuffs on me.  They
took me back to the Raspelhaus, in a state of profound stupidity.  I
did not know what to think; my conscience itself troubled me; I even
asked myself if I really had murdered the old woman!

In the eyes of the officers I was condemned.

I will not tell you of my emotions that night in the Raspelhaus,
when, seated on my straw bed with the window opposite me and the
gallows in perspective, I heard the watchmen cry in the silence of
the night: "Sleep, people of Nuremberg; the Lord watches over you.
One o'clock!  Two o'clock!  Three o'clock!"

Every one may form his own idea of such a night.  There is a fine
saying that it is better to be hanged innocent than guilty.  For the
soul, yes; but for the body, it makes no difference; on the contrary,
it kicks, it curses its lot, it tries to escape, knowing well enough
that its r√¥le ends with the rope.  Add to this, that it repents not
having sufficiently enjoyed life and at having listened to the soul
when it preached abstinence.

"Ah! if I had only known!" it cried, "you would not have led me about
by a string with your big words, your beautiful phrases, and your
magnificent sentences!  You would not have allured me with your fine
promises.  I should have had many happy moments that are now lost
forever.  Everything is over!  You said to me: 'Control your
passions.'  Very well!  I did control them.  Here I am now! they are
going to hang me, and you--later they will speak of you as a sublime
soul, a stoical soul, a martyr to the errors of Justice.  They will
never think about me!"

Such were the sad reflections of my poor body.

Day broke; at first, dull and undecided, it threw an uncertain light
on my bull's-eye window with its cross-bars; then it blazed against
the wall at the back.  Outside the street became lively.  This was a
market-day; it was Friday.  I heard the vegetable wagons pass and
also the country people with their baskets.  Some chickens cackled in
their coops in passing and some butter sellers chattered together.
The market opposite opened, and they began to arrange the stalls.

Finally, it was broad daylight and the vast murmur of the increasing
crowd, housekeepers who assembled with baskets on their arms, coming
and going, discussing and marketing, told me that it was eight
o'clock.

With the light, my heart gained a little courage.  Some of my black
thoughts disappeared.  I desired to see what was going on outside.

Other prisoners before me had managed to climb up to the bull's-eye;
they had dug some holes in the wall to mount more easily.  I climbed
in my turn, and, when seated in the oval edge of the window, with my
legs bent and my head bowed, I could see the crowd, and all the life
and movement.  Tears ran freely down my cheeks.  I thought no longer
of suicide--I experienced a need to live and breathe, which was
really extraordinary.

"Ah!" I said, "to live what happiness!  Let them harness me to a
wheelbarrow--let them put a ball and chain around my leg--nothing
matters if I may only live!"

The old market, with its roof shaped like an extinguisher, supported
on heavy pillars, made a superb picture: old women seated before
their panniers of vegetables, their cages of poultry and their
baskets of eggs; behind them the Jews, dealers in old clothes, their
faces the color of old boxwood; butchers with bare arms, cutting up
meat on their stalls; countrymen, with large hats on the backs of
their heads, calm and grave with their hands behind their backs and
resting on their sticks of hollywood, and tranquilly smoking their
pipes.  Then the tumult and noise of the crowd--those screaming,
shrill, grave, high, and short words--those expressive
gestures--those sudden attitudes that show from a distance the
progress of a discussion and depict so well the character of the
individual--in short, all this captivated my mind, and
notwithstanding my sad condition, I felt happy to be still of the
world.

Now, while I looked about in this manner, a man--a butcher--passed,
inclining forward and carrying an enormous quarter of beef on his
shoulders; his arms were bare, his elbows were raised upward and his
head was bent under them.  His long hair, like that of Salvator's
Sicambrian, hid his face from me; and yet, at the first glance, I
trembled.

"It is he!" I said.

All the blood in my body rushed to my heart.  I got down from the
window trembling to the ends of my fingers, feeling my cheeks quiver,
and the pallor spread over my face, stammering in a choked voice:

"It is he! he is there--there--and I, I have to die to expiate his
crime.  Oh, God! what shall I do?  What shall I do?"

A sudden idea, an inspiration from Heaven, flashed across my mind.  I
put my hand in the pocket of my coat--my box of crayons was there!

Then rushing to the wall, I began to trace the scene of the murder
with superhuman energy.  No uncertainty, no hesitation!  I knew the
man!  I had seen him!  He was there before me!

At ten o'clock the jailer came to my cell.  His owl-like
impassibility gave place to admiration.

"Is it possible?" he cried, standing at the threshold.

"Go, bring me my judges," I said to him, pursuing my work with an
increasing exultation.

Schl√ºssel answered:

"They are waiting for you in the trial-room."

"I wish to make a revelation," I cried, as I put the finishing
touches to the mysterious personage.

He lived; he was frightful to see.  His full-faced figure,
foreshortened upon the wall, stood out from the white background with
an astonishing vitality.

The jailer went away.

A few minutes afterward the two judges appeared.  They were
stupefied.  I, trembling, with extended hand, said to them:

"There is the murderer!"

After a few moments of silence, Van Spreckdal asked me:

"What is his name?"

"I don't know; but he is at this moment in the market; he is cutting
up meat in the third stall to the left as you enter from Trabaus
Street."

"What do you think?" said he, leaning toward his colleague.

"Send for the man," he replied in a grave tone.

Several officers retained in the corridor obeyed this order.  The
judges stood, examining the sketch.  As for me, I had dropped on my
bed of straw, my head between my knees, perfectly exhausted.

Soon steps were heard echoing under the archway.  Those who have
never awaited the hour of deliverance and counted the minutes, which
seem like centuries--those who have never experienced the sharp
emotions of outrage, terror, hope, and doubt--can have no conception
of the inward chills that I experienced at that moment.  I should
have distinguished the step of the murderer, walking between the
guards, among a thousand others.  They approached.  The judges
themselves seemed moved.  I raised up my head, my heart feeling as if
an iron hand had clutched it, and I fixed my eyes upon the closed
door.  It opened.  The man entered.  His cheeks were red and swollen,
the muscles in his large contracted jaws twitched as far as his ears,
and his little restless eyes, yellow like a wolf's, gleamed beneath
his heavy yellowish red eyebrows.

Van Spreckdal showed him the sketch in silence.

Then that murderous man, with the large shoulders, having looked,
grew pale--then, giving a roar which thrilled us all with terror, he
waved his enormous arms, and jumped backward to overthrow the guards.
There was a terrible struggle in the corridor; you could hear nothing
but the panting breathing of the butcher, his muttered imprecations,
and the short words and the shuffling feet of the guard, upon the
flagstones.

This lasted only about a minute.

Finally the assassin reentered, with his head hanging down, his eyes
bloodshot, and his hands fastened behind his back.  He looked again
at the picture of the murder; he seemed to reflect, and then, in a
low voice, as if talking to himself:

"Who could have seen me," he said, "at midnight?"

I was saved!

. . . . . . . . . .

Many years have passed since that terrible adventure.  Thank Heaven!
I make silhouettes no longer, nor portraits of burgomasters.  Through
hard work and perseverance, I have conquered my place in the world,
and I earn my living honorably by painting works of art--the sole
end, in my opinion, to which a true artist should aspire.  But the
memory of that nocturnal sketch has always remained in my mind.
Sometimes, in the midst of work, the thought of it recurs.  Then I
lay down my palette and dream for hours.

How could a crime committed by a man that I did not know--at a place
that I had never seen--have been reproduced by my pencil, in all its
smallest details?

Was it chance?  No!  And moreover, what is chance but the effect of a
cause of which we are ignorant?

Was Schiller right when he said: "The immortal soul does not
participate in the weaknesses of matter; during the sleep of the
body, it spreads its radiant wings and travels, God knows where!
What it then does, no one can say, but inspiration sometimes betrays
the secret of its nocturnal wanderings."

Who knows?  Nature is more audacious in her realities than man in his
most fantastic imaginings.




MR. HIGGINBOTHAM'S CATASTROPHE

BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

_Here is a story, one of the "Twice-Told Tales," the subject of which
might well have been selected for treatment by Poe.  In his hands,
how different the result would have been; how much more physical and
poignant, how much less spiritual and charming!_

_The real difference in the two writers is not so much a conflict of
artistic methods as it is a difference of moral make-up.  Hawthorne,
the son of a Salem sea captain, was descended from the grimmest
Puritans; Poe was the son of an actor._



MR. HIGGINBOTHAM'S CATASTROPHE

By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

A young fellow, a tobacco-pedler by trade, was on his way from
Morristown, where he had dealt largely with the Deacon of the Shaker
settlement, to the village of Parker's Falls, on Salmon River.  He
had a neat little cart, painted green, with a box of cigars depicted
on each side-panel, and an Indian chief, holding a pipe and a golden
tobacco-stalk, on the rear.  The pedler drove a smart little mare,
and was a young man of excellent character, keen at a bargain, but
none the worse liked by the Yankees; who, as I have heard them say,
would rather be shaved with a sharp razor than a dull one.
Especially was he beloved by the pretty girls along the Connecticut,
whose favor he used to court by presents of the best smoking tobacco
in his stock; knowing well that the country lasses of New England are
generally great performers on pipes.  Moreover, as will be seen in
the course of my story, the pedler was inquisitive, and something of
a tattler, always itching to hear the news, and anxious to tell it
again.

After an early breakfast at Morristown, the tobacco-pedler, whose
name was Dominicus Pike, had traveled seven miles through a solitary
piece of woods, without speaking a word to anybody but himself and
his little gray mare.  It being nearly seven o'clock, he was as eager
to hold a morning gossip as a city shopkeeper to read the morning
paper.  An opportunity seemed at hand, when, after lighting a cigar
with a sun-glass, he looked up and perceived a man coming over the
brow of the hill, at the foot of which the pedler had stopped his
green cart.  Dominicus watched him as he descended, and noticed that
he carried a bundle over his shoulder on the end of a stick, and
traveled with a weary, yet determined pace.  He did not look as if he
had started in the freshness of the morning, but had footed it all
night, and meant to do the same all day.

"Good-morning, mister," said Dominicus, when within speaking
distance.  "You go a pretty good jog.  What's the latest news at
Parker's Falls?"

The man pulled the broad brim of a gray hat over his eyes, and
answered, rather sullenly, that he did not come from Parker's Falls,
which, as being the limit of his own day's journey, the pedler had
naturally mentioned in his inquiry.

"Well, then," rejoined Dominicus Pike, "let's have the latest news
where you did come from.  I'm not particular about Parker's Falls.
Any place will answer."

Being thus importuned, the traveler--who was as ill-looking a fellow
as one would desire to meet, in a solitary piece of woods--appeared
to hesitate a little, as if he was either searching his memory for
news or weighing the expediency of telling it.  At last, mounting on
the step of the cart, he whispered in the ear of Dominicus, though he
might have shouted aloud and no other mortal would have heard him.

"I do remember one little trifle of news," said he.  "Old Mr.
Higginbotham, of Kimballton, was murdered in his orchard, at eight
o'clock last night, by an Irishman and a nigger.  They strung him up
to the branch of a St. Michael's pear-tree, where nobody would find
him till the morning."

As soon as this horrible intelligence was communicated the stranger
betook himself to his journey again, with more speed than ever, not
even turning his head when Dominicus invited him to smoke a Spanish
cigar and relate all the particulars.  The pedler whistled to his
mare and went up the hill, pondering on the doleful fate of Mr.
Higginbotham, whom he had known in the way of trade, having sold him
many a bunch of long nines, and a great deal of pigtail, lady's
twist, and fig tobacco.  He was rather astonished at the rapidity
with which the news had spread.  Kimballton was nearly sixty miles
distant in a straight line; the murder had been perpetrated only at
eight o'clock the preceding night; yet Dominicus had heard of it at
seven in the morning, when, in all probability, poor Mr.
Higginbotham'a own family had but just discovered his corpse, hanging
on the St. Michael's pear-tree.  The stranger on foot must have worn
seven-league boots, to travel at such a rate.

"Ill news flies fast, they say," thought Dominicus Pike; "but this
beats railroads.  The fellow ought to be hired to go express with the
President's Message."

The difficulty was solved by supposing that the narrator had made a
mistake of one day in the date of the occurrence; so that our friend
did not hesitate to introduce the story at every tavern and country
store along the road, expending a whole bunch of Spanish wrappers
among at least twenty horrified audiences.  He found himself
invariably the first bearer of the intelligence, and was so pestered
with questions that he could not avoid filling up the outline, till
it became quite a respectable narrative.  He met with one piece of
corroborative evidence.  Mr. Higginbotham was a trader; and a former
clerk of his, to whom Dominicus related the facts, testified that the
old gentleman was accustomed to return home through the orchard,
about nightfall, with the money and valuable papers of the store in
his pocket.  The clerk manifested but little grief at Mr.
Higginbotham's catastrophe, hinting, what the pedler had discovered
in his own dealings with him, that he was a crusty old fellow, as
close as a vise.  His property would descend to a pretty niece who
was now keeping school in Kimballton.

What with telling the news for the public good, and driving bargains
for his own, Dominicus was so much delayed on the road that he chose
to put up at a tavern, about five miles short of Parker's Falls.
After supper, lighting one of his prime cigars, he seated himself in
the barroom, and went through the story of the murder, which had
grown so fast that it took him a half hour to tell.  There were as
many as twenty people in the room, nineteen of whom received it all
for gospel.  But the twentieth was an elderly farmer, who had arrived
on horseback a short time before, and was now seated in a corner
smoking his pipe.  When the story was concluded, he rose up very
deliberately, brought his chair right in front of Dominicus, and
stared him full in the face, puffing out the vilest tobacco smoke the
pedler had ever smelled.

"Will you make affidavit," demanded he in the tone of a country
justice taking an examination, "that old Squire Higginbotham of
Kimballton was murdered in his orchard the night before last, and
found hanging on his great pear-tree yesterday morning?"

"I tell the story as I heard it, mister," answered Dominicus,
dropping his half-burned cigar; "I don't say that I saw the thing
done.  So I can't take my oath that he was murdered exactly in that
way."

"But I can take mine," said the farmer, "that if Squire Higginbotham
was murdered night before last, I drank a glass of bitters with his
ghost this morning.  Being a neighbor of mine, he called me into his
store, as I was riding by, and treated me, and then asked me to do a
little business for him on the road.  He didn't seem to know any more
about his own murder than I did."

"Why, then, it can't be a fact!" exclaimed Dominicus Pike.

"I guess he'd have mentioned it, if it was," said the old farmer; and
he removed his chair back to the corner, leaving Dominicus quite down
in the mouth.

Here was a sad resurrection of old Mr. Higginbotham!  The pedler had
no heart to mingle in the conversation any more, but comforted
himself with a glass of gin and water, and went to bed, where, all
night long, he dreamed of hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree.  To
avoid the old farmer (whom he so detested that his suspension would
have pleased him better than Mr. Higginbotham's), Dominicus rose in
the gray of the morning, put the little mare into the green cart, and
trotted swiftly away toward Parker's Falls.  The fresh breeze, the
dewy road, and the pleasant summer dawn revived his spirits, and
might have encouraged him to repeat the old story had there been
anybody awake to hear it.  But he met neither ox-team, light wagon,
chaise, horseman, nor foot-traveler, till, just as he crossed Salmon
River, a man came trudging down to the bridge with a bundle over his
shoulder, on the end of a stick.

"Good morning, mister," said the pedler, reining in his mare.  "If
you come from Kimballton or that neighborhood maybe you can tell me
the real fact about this affair of old Mr. Higginbotham.  Was the old
fellow actually murdered, two or three nights ago, by an Irishman and
a nigger?"

Dominicus had spoken in too great a hurry to observe, at first, that
the stranger himself had a deep tinge of negro blood.  On hearing
this sudden question, the Ethiopian appeared to change his skin, its
yellow hue becoming a ghastly white, while, shaking and stammering,
he thus replied:

"No! no!  There was no colored man!  It was an Irishman that hanged
him last night, at eight o'clock.  I came away at seven!  His folks
can't have looked for him in the orchard yet."

Scarcely had the yellow man spoken, when he interrupted himself, and,
though he seemed weary enough before, continued his journey at a pace
which would have kept the pedler's mare on a smart trot.  Dominicus
stared after him in great perplexity.  If the murder had not been
committed till Tuesday night, who was the prophet that had foretold
it, in all its circumstances, on Tuesday morning?  If Mr.
Higginbotham's corpse were not yet discovered by his own family, how
came the mulatto, at above thirty miles' distance, to know that he
was hanging in the orchard, especially as he had left Kimballton
before the unfortunate man was hanged at all?  These ambiguous
circumstances, with the stranger's surprise and terror, made
Dominicus think of raising a hue and cry after him, as an accomplice
in the murder; since a murder, it seemed, had really been perpetrated.

"But let the poor devil go," thought the pedler.  "I don't want his
black blood on my head; and hanging the nigger wouldn't unhang Mr.
Higginbotham.  Unhang the old gentleman!  It's a sin, I know; but I
should hate to have him come to life a second time, and give me the
lie!"

With these meditations, Dominicus Pike drove into the street of
Parker's Falls, which, as everybody knows, is as thriving a village
as three cotton factories and a slitting mill can make it.  The
machinery was not in motion, and but a few of the shop doors
unbarred, when he alighted in the stable-yard of the tavern, and made
it his first business to order the mare four quarts of oats.  His
second duty, of course, was to impart Mr. Higginbotham's catastrophe
to the hostler.  He deemed it advisable, however, not to be too
positive as to the date of the direful fact, and also to be uncertain
whether it were perpetrated by an Irishman and a mulatto, or by the
son of Erin alone.  Neither did he profess to relate it on his own
authority, nor that of any one person; but mentioned it as a report
generally diffused.

The story ran through the town like fire among girdled trees, and
became so much the universal talk that nobody could tell whence it
had originated.  Mr. Higginbotham was as well known at Parker's Falls
as any citizen of the place, being part owner of the slitting mill,
and a considerable stockholder in the cotton factories.  The
inhabitants felt their own prosperity interested in his fate.  Such
was the excitement that the "Parker's Falls Gazette" anticipated its
regular day of publication, and came out with half a form of blank
paper and a column of double pica emphasized with capitals, and
headed "HORRID MURDER OF MR. HIGGINBOTHAM!"  Among other dreadful
details, the printed account described the mark of the cord round the
dead man's neck, and stated the number of thousand dollars of which
he had been robbed; there was much pathos also about the affliction
of his niece, who had gone from one fainting fit to another, ever
since her uncle was found hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree with
his pockets inside out.  The village poet likewise commemorated the
young lady's grief in seventeen stanzas of a ballad.  The selectmen
held a meeting, and, in consideration of Mr. Higginbotham's claims on
the town, determined to issue handbills, offering a reward of five
hundred dollars for the apprehension of his murderers, and the
recovery of the stolen property.

Meanwhile, the whole population of Parker's Falls, consisting of
shopkeepers, mistresses of boarding-houses, factory girls, mill men,
and schoolboys, rushed into the street, and kept up such a terrible
loquacity as more than compensated for the silence of the
cotton-machines which refrained from their usual din, out of respect
to the deceased.  Had Mr. Higginbotham cared about posthumous renown,
his untimely ghost would have exulted in this tumult.  Our friend
Dominicus, in his vanity of heart, forgot his intended precautions,
and, mounting on the town pump, announced himself as the bearer of
the authentic intelligence which had caused so wonderful a sensation.
He immediately became the great man of the moment, and had just begun
a new edition of the narrative, with a voice like a field preacher,
when the mail stage drove into the village street.  It had traveled
all night, and must have shifted horses at Kimballton at three in the
morning.

"Now we shall hear all the particulars," shouted the crowd.

The coach rumbled up to the piazza of the tavern, followed by a
thousand people; for if any man had been minding his own business
till then, he now left it at sixes and sevens, to hear the news.  The
pedler, foremost in the race, discovered two passengers, both of whom
had been startled from a comfortable nap to find themselves in the
centre of a mob.  Every man assailing them with separate questions,
all propounded at once, the couple were struck speechless, though one
was a lawyer and the other a young lady.

"Mr. Higginbotham!  Mr. Higginbotham!  Tell us the particulars about
old Mr. Higginbotham!" bawled the mob.  "What is the coroner's
verdict?  Are the murderers apprehended?  Is Mr. Higginbotham's niece
come out of her fainting fits?  Mr. Higginbotham!  Mr. Higginbotham!!"

The coachman said not a word, except to swear awfully at the hostler
for not bringing him a fresh team of horses.  The lawyer inside had
generally his wits about him, even when asleep; the first thing he
did, after learning the cause of the excitement, was to produce a
large red pocketbook.  Meantime, Dominicus Pike, being an extremely
polite young man, and also suspecting that a female tongue would tell
the story as glibly as a lawyer's, had handed the lady out of the
coach.  She was a fine, smart girl, now wide-awake and bright as a
button, and had such a sweet, pretty mouth that Dominicus would
almost as lief have heard a love tale from it as a tale of murder.

"Gentlemen and ladies," said the lawyer, to the shopkeepers, the mill
men, and the factory girls, "I can assure you that some unaccountable
mistake, or, more probably, a wilful falsehood, maliciously contrived
to injure Mr. Higginbotham's credit, has excited this singular
uproar.  We passed through Kimballton at three o'clock this morning,
and most certainly should have been informed of the murder had any
been perpetrated.  But I have proof, nearly as strong as Mr.
Higginbotham's own oral testimony, in the negative.  Here is a note,
relating to a suit of his in the Connecticut courts, which was
delivered me from that gentleman himself.  I find it dated at ten
o'clock last evening."

So saying, the lawyer exhibited the date and signature of the note,
which irrefragably proved, either that this perverse Mr. Higginbotham
was alive when he wrote it, or--as some deemed the more probable case
of two doubtful ones--that he was so absorbed in worldly business as
to continue to transact it, even after his death.  But unexpected
evidence was forthcoming.  The young lady, after listening to the
pedler's explanation, merely seized a moment to smooth her gown and
put her curls in order, and then appeared at the tavern-door, making
a modest signal to be heard.

"Good people," said she, "I am Mr. Higginbotham's niece."

A wondering murmur passed through the crowd, on beholding her so rosy
and bright; that same unhappy niece whom they had supposed, on the
authority of the "Parker's Falls Gazette," to be lying at death's
door in a fainting fit.  But some shrewd fellows had doubted, all
along, whether a young lady would be quite so desperate at the
hanging of a rich old uncle.

"You see," continued Miss Higginbotham, with a smile, "that this
strange story is quite unfounded, as to myself; and I believe I may
affirm it to be equally so in regard to my dear uncle Higginbotham.
He has the kindness to give me a home in his house, though I
contribute to my own support by teaching a school.  I left Kimballton
this morning to spend the vacation of commencement week with a
friend, about five miles from Parker's Falls.  My generous uncle,
when he heard me on the stairs, called me to his bedside, and gave me
two dollars and fifty cents, to pay my stage fare, and another dollar
for my extra expenses.  He then laid his pocketbook under his pillow,
shook hands with me, and advised me to take some biscuit in my bag,
instead of breakfasting on the road.  I feel confident, therefore,
that I left my beloved relative alive, and trust that I shall find
him so on my return."

The young lady courtesied at the close of her speech, which was so
sensible and well-worded, and delivered with such grace and
propriety, that everybody thought her fit to be Preceptress of the
best Academy in the State.  But a stranger would have supposed that
Mr. Higginbotham was an object of abhorrence at Parker's Falls, and
that a thanksgiving had been proclaimed for his murder, so excessive
was the wrath of the inhabitants on learning their mistake.  The mill
men resolved to bestow public honors on Dominicus Pike, only
hesitating whether to tar and feather him, ride him on a rail, or
refresh him with an ablution at the town-pump on the top of which he
had declared himself the bearer of the news.  The selectmen, by
advice of the lawyer, spoke of prosecuting him for a misdemeanor, in
circulating unfounded reports, to the great disturbance of the peace
of the commonwealth.  Nothing saved Dominicus, either from mob law or
a court of justice, but an eloquent appeal made by the young lady in
his behalf.  Addressing a few words of heartfelt gratitude to his
benefactress, he mounted the green cart and rode out of town, under a
discharge of artillery from the schoolboys, who found plenty of
ammunition in the neighboring clay-pits and mud-holes.  As he turned
his head, to exchange a farewell glance with Mr. Higginbotham's
niece, a ball, of the consistence of hasty-pudding, hit him slap in
the mouth, giving him a most grim aspect.  His whole person was so
bespattered with the like filthy missiles, that he had almost a mind
to ride back and supplicate for the threatened ablution at the
town-pump; for, though not meant in kindness, it would now have been
a deed of charity.

However, the sun shone bright on poor Dominicus, and the mud, an
emblem of all stains of undeserved opprobrium, was easily brushed off
when dry.  Being a funny rogue, his heart soon cheered up; nor could
he refrain from a hearty laugh at the uproar which his story had
excited.  The hand-bills of the selectmen would cause the commitment
of all the vagabonds in the State; the paragraph in the "Parker's
Falls Gazette" would be reprinted from Maine to Florida, and perhaps
form an item in the London newspapers; and many a miser would tremble
for his money-bags and life, on learning the catastrophe of Mr.
Higginbotham.  The pedler meditated with much fervor on the charms of
the young schoolmistress, and swore that Daniel Webster never spoke
nor looked so like an angel as Miss Higginbotham, while defending him
from the wrathful populace at Parker's Falls.

Dominicus was now on the Kimballton Turnpike, having all along
determined to visit that place, though business had drawn him out of
the most direct road from Morristown.  As he approached the scene of
the supposed murder, he continued to revolve the circumstances in his
mind, and was astonished at the aspect which the whole case assumed.
Had nothing occurred to corroborate the story of the first traveler,
it might now have been considered as a hoax; but the yellow man was
evidently acquainted either with the report or the fact; and there
was a mystery in his dismayed and guilty look on being abruptly
questioned.  When, to this singular combination of incidents, it was
added that the rumor tallied exactly with Mr. Higginbotham's
character and habits of life; and that he had an orchard, and a St.
Michael's pear-tree, near which he always passed at nightfall; the
circumstantial evidence appeared so strong that Dominicus doubted
whether the autograph produced by the lawyer, or even the niece's
direct testimony, ought to be equivalent.  Making cautious inquiries
along the road, the pedler further learned that Mr. Higginbotham had
in his service an Irishman of doubtful character, whom he had hired
without a recommendation, on the score of economy.

"May I be hanged myself," exclaimed Dominicus Pike aloud, on reaching
the top of a lonely hill, "if I'll believe old Higginbotham is
unhanged till I see him with my own eyes and hear it from his own
mouth?  And as he's a real shaver, I'll have the minister or some
other responsible man for an endorser."

It was growing dusk when he reached the toll-house on Kimballton
Turnpike, about a quarter of a mile from the village of this name.
His little mare was fast bringing him up with a man on horseback, who
trotted through the gate a few rods in advance of him, nodded to the
toll-gatherer, and kept on toward the village.  Dominicus was
acquainted with the toll-man, and while making change the usual
remarks on the weather passed between them.

"I suppose," said the pedler, throwing back his whip-lash, to bring
it down like a feather on the mare's flank, "you have not seen
anything of old Mr. Higginbotham within a day or two?"

"Yes," answered the toll-gatherer.  "He passed the gate just before
you drove up, and yonder he rides now, if you can see him through the
dusk.  He's been to Woodfield this afternoon, attending a sheriff's
sale there.  The old man generally shakes hands and has a little chat
with me; but to-night he nodded--as if to say, 'Charge my toll'--and
jogged on; for wherever he goes, he must always be home at eight
o'clock."

"So they tell me," said Dominicus.

"I never saw a man look so yellow and thin as the squire does,"
continued the toll-gatherer.  "Says I to myself, to-night, 'He's more
like a ghost or an old mummy than good flesh and blood.'"

The pedler strained his eyes through the twilight, and could just
discern the horseman, now far ahead on the village road.  He seemed
to recognize the rear of Mr. Higginbotham; but through the evening
shadows, and amid the dust from the horse's feet, the figure appeared
dim and unsubstantial; as if the shape of the mysterious old man were
faintly molded of darkness and gray light.  Dominicus shivered.

"Mr. Higginbotham has come back from the other world, by way of the
Kimballton Turnpike," thought he.

He shook the reins and rode forward, keeping about the same distance
in the rear of the gray old shadow, till the latter was concealed by
a bend of the road.  On reaching this point, the pedler no longer saw
the man on horseback, but found himself at the head of the village
street, not far from a number of stores and two taverns, clustered
round the meeting-house steeple.  On his left was a stone wall and a
gate, the boundary of a wood-lot, beyond which lay an orchard,
further still a mowing field, and last of all a house.  These were
the premises of Mr. Higginbotham, whose dwelling stood beside the old
highway, but had been left in the background by the Kimballton
Turnpike.  Dominicus knew the place; and the little mare stopped
short by instinct; for he was not conscious of tightening the reins.

"For the soul of me, I can not get by this gate!" said he, trembling.
"I never shall be my own again, till I see whether Mr. Higginbotham
is hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree!"

He leaped from the cart, gave the rein a turn around the gate-post,
and ran along the green path of the wood-lot, as if Old Nick were
chasing behind.  Just then the village clock tolled eight, and as
each deep stroke fell, Dominicus gave a fresh bound and flew faster
than before, till, dim in the solitary centre of the orchard, he saw
the fated pear-tree.  One great branch stretched from the old
contorted trunk across the path, and threw the darkest shadow on that
one spot.  But something seemed to struggle beneath the branch!

The pedler had never pretended to more courage than befits a man of
peaceable occupation, nor could he account for his valor on this
awful emergency.  Certain it is, however, that he rushed forward,
prostrated a sturdy Irishman with the butt-end of his whip, and
found--not indeed hanging on the St. Michael's pear-tree, but
trembling beneath it, with a halter round his neck--the old identical
Mr. Higginbotham!

"Mr. Higginbotham," said Dominicus, tremulously, "you're an honest
man, and I'll take your word for it.  Have you been hanged or not?"

If the riddle be not already guessed, a few words will explain the
simple machinery by which this "coming event" was made to "cast its
shadow before."  Three men had plotted the robbery and murder of Mr.
Higginbotham; two of them, successively, lost courage and fled, each
delaying the crime one night by their disappearance; the third was in
the act of perpetration, when a champion, blindly obeying the call of
fate, like the heroes of old romance, appeared in the person of
Dominicus Pike.

It only remains to say that Mr. Higginbotham took the pedler into
high favor, sanctioned his addresses to the pretty schoolmistress,
and settled his whole property on their children, allowing themselves
the interest.  In due time, the old gentleman capped the climax of
his favors by dying a Christian death, in bed, since which melancholy
event Dominicus Pike has removed from Kimballton, and established a
large tobacco manufactory in my native village.




THE WHITE OLD MAID

BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

_This is an admirable example of Hawthorne's point of view and style.
Starting with an aim to leave one strong impression on the mind of
the reader, instead of the remembrance of a number of related facts,
the author not only omits everything that would detract from the
unity and strength of this impression, but creates only such scenes
and situations as will intensify the effect._



THE WHITE OLD MAID

By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

The moonbeams came through two deep and narrow windows and showed a
spacious chamber richly furnished in an antique fashion.  From one
lattice the shadow of the diamond panes was thrown upon the floor;
the ghostly light through the other swept upon a bed, falling between
the heavy silken curtains and illuminating the face of a young man.
But how quietly the slumberer lay! how pale his features!  And how
like a shroud the sheet was wound about his frame!  Yes, it was a
corpse in its burial clothes.

Suddenly the fixed features seemed to move with dark emotion.
Strange fantasy!  It was but the shadow of the fringed curtain waving
between the dead face and the moonlight as the door of the chamber
opened and a girl stole softly to the bedside.  Was there delusion in
the moonbeams, or did her gesture and her eye betray a gleam of
triumph as she bent over the pale corpse, pale as itself, and pressed
her living lips to the cold ones of the dead?  As she drew back from
that long kiss her features writhed as if a proud heart were fighting
with its anguish.  Again it seemed that the features of the corpse
had moved responsive to her own.  Still an illusion.  The silken
curtains had waved a second time between the dead face and the
moonlight as another fair young girl unclosed the door and glided
ghostlike to the bedside.  There the two maidens stood, both
beautiful, with the pale beauty of the dead between them.  But she
who had first entered was proud and stately, and the other a soft and
fragile thing.

"Away!" cried the lofty one.  "Thou hadst him living; the dead is
mine."

"Thine!" returned the other, shuddering.  "Well hast thou spoken; the
dead is thine."

The proud girl started and stared into her face with a ghastly look,
but a wild and mournful expression passed across the features of the
gentle one, and, weak and helpless, she sank down on the bed, her
head pillowed beside that of the corpse and her hair mingling with
his dark locks.  A creature of hope and joy, the first draft of
sorrow had bewildered her.

"Edith!" cried her rival.

Edith groaned as with a sudden compression of the heart, and removing
her cheek from the dead youth's pillow, she stood upright, fearfully
encountering the eyes of the lofty girl.

"Wilt thou betray me?" said the latter, calmly.

"Till the dead bid me speak I will be silent," answered Edith.
"Leave us alone together.  Go and live many years, and then return
and tell me of thy life.  He too will be here.  Then, if thou tellest
of sufferings more than death, we will both forgive thee."

"And what shall be the token?" asked the proud girl, as if her heart
acknowledged a meaning in these wild words.

"This lock of hair," said Edith, lifting one of the dark clustering
curls that lay heavily on the dead man's brow.

The two maidens joined their hands over the bosom of the corpse and
appointed a day and hour far, far in time to come for their next
meeting in that chamber.  The statelier girl gave one deep look at
the motionless countenance and departed, yet turned again and
trembled ere she closed the door, almost believing that her dead
lover frowned upon her.  And Edith, too!  Was not her white form
fading into the moonlight?  Scorning her own weakness, she went forth
and perceived that a negro slave was waiting in the passage with a
waxlight, which he held between her face and his own and regarded
her, as she thought, with an ugly expression of merriment.  Lifting
his torch on high, the slave lighted her down the staircase and undid
the portal of the mansion.  The young clergyman of the town had just
ascended the steps, and, bowing to the lady, passed in without a word.

Years--many years--rolled on.  The world seemed new again, so much
older was it grown since the night when those pale girls had clasped
their hands across the bosom of the corpse.  In the interval a lonely
woman had passed from youth to extreme age, and was known by all the
town as the "Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet."  A taint of insanity had
affected her whole life, but so quiet, sad, and gentle, so utterly
free from violence, that she was suffered to pursue her harmless
fantasies unmolested by the world with whose business or pleasures
she had naught to do.  She dwelt alone, and never came into the
daylight except to follow funerals.  Whenever a corpse was borne
along the street, in sunshine, rain, or snow, whether a pompous train
of the rich and proud thronged after it, or few and humble were the
mourners, behind them came the lonely woman in a long white garment
which the people called her shroud.  She took no place among the
kindred or the friends, but stood at the door to hear the funeral
prayer, and walked in the rear of the procession as one whose earthly
charge it was to haunt the house of mourning and be the shadow of
affliction and see that the dead were duly buried.  So long had this
been her custom that the inhabitants of the town deemed her a part of
every funeral, as much as the coffin-pall or the very corpse itself,
and augured ill of the sinner's destiny unless the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet came gliding like a ghost behind.  Once, it is said,
she affrighted a bridal-party with her pale presence, appearing
suddenly in the illuminated hall just as the priest was uniting a
false maid to a wealthy man before her lover had been dead a year.
Evil was the omen to that marriage.  Sometimes she stole forth by
moonlight and visited the graves of venerable integrity and wedded
love and virgin innocence, and every spot where the ashes of a kind
and faithful heart were moldering.  Over the hillocks of those
favored dead would she stretch out her arms with a gesture as if she
were scattering seeds, and many believed that she brought them from
the garden of Paradise, for the graves which she had visited were
green beneath the snow and covered with sweet flowers from April to
November.  Her blessing was better than a holy verse upon the
tombstone.  Thus wore away her long, sad, peaceful, and fantastic
life till few were so old as she, and the people of later generations
wondered how the dead had ever been buried or mourners had endured
their grief without the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.  Still years
went on, and still she followed funerals and was not yet summoned to
her own festival of death.

One afternoon the great street of the town was all alive with
business and bustle, though the sun now gilded only the upper half of
the church-spire, having left the house-tops and loftiest trees in
shadow.  The scene was cheerful and animated in spite of the sombre
shade between the high brick buildings.  Here were pompous merchants
in white wigs and laced velvet, the bronzed faces of sea-captains,
the foreign garb and air of Spanish Creoles, and the disdainful port
of natives of Old England, all contrasted with the rough aspect of
one or two back-settlers negotiating sales of timber from forests
where ax had never sounded.  Sometimes a lady passed, swelling
roundly forth in an embroidered petticoat, balancing her steps in
high-heeled shoes and courtesying with lofty grace to the punctilious
obeisances of the gentlemen.  The life of the town seemed to have its
very centre not far from an old mansion that stood somewhat back from
the pavement, surrounded by neglected grass, with a strange air of
loneliness rather deepened than dispelled by the throng so near it.
Its site would have been suitably occupied by a magnificent Exchange
or a brick block lettered all over with various signs, or the large
house itself might have made a noble tavern with the "King's Arms"
swinging before it and guests in every chamber, instead of the
present solitude.  But, owing to some dispute about the right of
inheritance, the mansion had been long without a tenant, decaying
from year to year and throwing the stately gloom of its shadow over
the busiest part of the town.

Such was the scene, and such the time, when a figure unlike any that
have been described was observed at a distance down the street.

"I spy a strange sail yonder," remarked a Liverpool captain--"that
woman in the long white garment."

The sailor seemed much struck by the object, as were several others
who at the same moment caught a glimpse of the figure that had
attracted his notice.  Almost immediately the various topics of
conversation gave place to speculations in an undertone on this
unwonted occurrence.

"Can there be a funeral so late this afternoon?" inquired some.

They looked for the signs of death at every door--the sexton, the
hearse, the assemblage of black-clad relatives, all that makes up the
woful pomp of funerals.  They raised their eyes, also, to the
sun-gilded spire of the church, and wondered that no clang proceeded
from its bell, which had always tolled till now when this figure
appeared in the light of day.  But none had heard that a corpse was
to be borne to its home that afternoon, nor was there any token of a
funeral except the apparition of the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

"What may this portend?" asked each man of his neighbor.

All smiled as they put the question, yet with a certain trouble in
their eyes, as if pestilence, or some other wide calamity, were
prognosticated by the untimely intrusion among the living of one
whose presence had always been associated with death and woe.  What a
comet is to the earth was that sad woman to the town.  Still she
moved on, while the hum of surprise was hushed at her approach, and
the proud and the humble stood aside that her white garment might not
wave against them.  It was a long, loose robe of spotless purity.
Its wearer appeared very old, pale, emaciated, and feeble, yet glided
onward without the unsteady pace of extreme age.  At one point of her
course a little rosy boy burst forth from a door and ran with open
arms toward the ghostly woman, seeming to expect a kiss from her
bloodless lips.  She made a slight pause, fixing her eye upon him
with an expression of no earthly sweetness, so that the child
shivered and stood awestruck rather than affrighted while the Old
Maid passed on.  Perhaps her garment might have been polluted even by
an infant's touch; perhaps her kiss would have been death to the
sweet boy within the year.

"She is but a shadow," whispered the superstitious.  "The child put
forth his arms and could not grasp her robe."

The wonder was increased when the Old Maid passed beneath the porch
of the deserted mansion, ascended the moss-covered steps, lifted the
iron knocker and gave three raps.  The people could only conjecture
that some old remembrance, troubling her bewildered brain, had
impelled the poor woman hither to visit the friends of her youth--all
gone from their home long since, and forever, unless their ghosts
still haunted it, fit company for the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet.

An elderly man approached the steps, and, reverently uncovering his
gray locks, essayed to explain the matter.

"None, madam," said he, "have dwelt in this house these fifteen years
agone--no, not since the death of old Colonel Fenwicke, whose funeral
you may remember to have followed.  His heirs, being ill-agreed among
themselves, have let the mansion-house go to ruin."

The Old Maid looked slowly round with a slight gesture of one hand
and a finger of the other upon her lip, appearing more shadow-like
than ever in the obscurity of the porch.  But again she lifted the
hammer, and gave, this time, a single rap.  Could it be that a
footstep was now heard coming down the staircase of the old mansion
which all conceived to have been so long untenanted?  Slowly, feebly,
yet heavily, like the pace of an aged and infirm person, the step
approached, more distinct on every downward stair, till it reached
the portal.  The bar fell on the inside; the door was opened.  One
upward glance toward the church-spire, whence the sunshine had just
faded, was the last that the people saw of the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet.

"Who undid the door?" asked many.

This question, owing to the depth of shadow beneath the porch, no one
could satisfactorily answer.  Two or three aged men, while protesting
against an inference which might be drawn, affirmed that the person
within was a negro, and bore a singular resemblance to Old C√¶sar,
formerly a slave in the house, but freed by death some thirty years
before.

"Her summons has waked up a servant of the old family," said one,
half seriously.

"Let us wait here," replied another; "more guests will knock at the
door anon.  But the gate of the graveyard should be thrown open."

Twilight had overspread the town before the crowd began to separate
or the comments on this incident were exhausted.  One after another
was wending his way homeward, when a coach--no common spectacle in
those days--drove slowly into the street.  It was an old-fashioned
equipage, hanging close to the ground, with arms on the panels, a
footman behind, and a grave, corpulent coachman seated high in front,
the whole giving an idea of solemn state and dignity.  There was
something awful in the heavy rumbling of the wheels.

The coach rolled down the street, till, coming to the gateway of the
deserted mansion, it drew up, and the footman sprang to the ground.

"Whose grand coach is this?" asked a very inquisitive body.

The footman made no reply, but ascended the steps of the old house,
gave three taps with the iron hammer, and returned to open the coach
door.  An old man possessed of the heraldic lore so common in that
day examined the shield of arms on the panel.

"Azure, a lion's head erased, between three flowers-de-luce," said
he, then whispered the name of the family to whom these bearings
belonged.  The last inheritor of its honors was recently dead, after
a long residence amid the splendor of the British court, where his
birth and wealth had given him no mean station.  "He left no child,"
continued the herald, "and these arms, being in a lozenge, betoken
that the coach appertains to his widow."

Further disclosures, perhaps, might have been made had not the
speaker been suddenly struck dumb by the stern eye of an ancient lady
who thrust forth her head from the coach preparing to descend.  As
she emerged, the people saw that her dress was magnificent, and her
figure dignified in spite of age and infirmity--a stately ruin, but
with a look at once of pride and wretchedness.  Her strong and rigid
features had an awe about them unlike that of the white Old Maid, but
as of something evil.  She passed up the steps, leaning on a
gold-headed cane.  The door swung open as she ascended, and the light
of a torch glittered on the embroidery of her dress and gleamed on
the pillars of the porch.  After a momentary pause, a glance backward
and then a desperate effort, she went in.

The decipherer of the coat-of-arms had ventured up the lower step,
and, shrinking back immediately, pale and tremulous, affirmed that
the torch was held by the very image of Old C√¶sar.

"But such a hideous grin," added he, "was never seen on the face of
mortal man, black or white.  It will haunt me till my dying day."

Meantime, the coach had wheeled round with a prodigious clatter on
the pavement and rumbled up the street, disappearing in the twilight,
while the ear still tracked its course.  Scarcely was it gone when
the people began to question whether the coach and attendants, the
ancient lady, the spectre of Old C√¶sar and the Old Maid herself were
not all a strangely combined delusion with some dark purport in its
mystery.  The whole town was astir, so that, instead of dispersing,
the crowd continually increased, and stood gazing up at the windows
of the mansion, now silvered by the brightening moon.  The elders,
glad to indulge the narrative propensity of age, told of the
long-faded splendor of.  the family, the entertainments they had
given and the guests, the greatest of the land, and even titled and
noble ones from abroad, who had passed beneath that portal.  These
graphic reminiscences seemed to call up the ghosts of those to whom
they referred.  So strong was the impression on some of the more
imaginative hearers that two or three were seized with trembling fits
at one and the same moment, protesting that they had distinctly heard
three other raps of the iron knocker.

"Impossible!" exclaimed others.  "See!  The moon shines beneath the
porch, and shows every part of it except in the narrow shade of that
pillar.  There is no one there."

"Did not the door open?" whispered one of these fanciful persons.

"Didst thou see it too?" said his companion, in a startled tone.

But the general sentiment was opposed to the idea that a third
visitant had made application at the door of the deserted house.  A
few, however, adhered to this new marvel, and even declared that a
red gleam like that of a torch had shone through the great front
window, as if the negro were lighting a guest up the staircase.  This
too was pronounced a mere fantasy.

But at once the whole multitude started, and each man beheld his own
terror painted in the faces of all the rest.

"What an awful thing is this!" cried they.

A shriek, too fearfully distinct for doubt, had been heard within the
mansion, breaking forth suddenly and succeeded by a deep stillness,
as if a heart had burst in giving it utterance.  The people knew not
whether to fly from the very sight of the house or to rush trembling
in and search out the strange mystery.  Amid their confusion and
affright they were somewhat reassured by the appearance of their
clergyman, a venerable patriarch, and equally a saint, who had taught
them and their fathers the way to heaven for more than the space of
an ordinary lifetime.  He was a reverend figure with long white hair
upon his shoulders, a white beard upon his breast, and a back so bent
over his staff that he seemed to be looking downward continually, as
if to choose a proper grave for his weary frame.  It was some time
before the good old man, being deaf and of impaired intellect, could
be made to comprehend such portions of the affair as were
comprehensible at all.  But when possessed of the facts, his energies
assumed unexpected vigor.

"Verily," said the old gentleman, "it will b$ fitting that I enter
the mansion-house of the worthy Colonel Fenwicke; lest any harm
should have befallen that true Christian woman whom ye call the 'Old
Maid in the Winding-Sheet.'"

Behold, then, the venerable clergyman ascending the steps of the
mansion with a torch-bearer behind him.  It was the elderly man who
had spoken to the Old Maid, and the same who had afterward explained
the shield of arms and recognized the features of the negro.  Like
their predecessors, they gave three raps with the iron hammer.

"Old C√¶sar cometh not," observed the priest.  "Well, I wot he no
longer doth service in this mansion."

"Assuredly, then, it was something worse in Old C√¶sar's likeness,"
said the other adventurer.

"Be it as God wills," answered the clergyman.  "See! my strength,
though it be much decayed, hath sufficed to, open this heavy door.
Let us enter and pass up the staircase."

Here occurred a singular exemplification of the dreamy state of a
very old man's mind.  As they ascended the wide flight of stairs the
aged clergyman appeared to move with caution, occasionally standing
aside, and oftener bending his head, as it were in salutation, thus
practising all the gestures of one who makes his way through a
throng.  Reaching the head of the staircase, he looked around with
sad and solemn benignity, laid aside his staff, bared his hoary
locks, and was evidently on the point of commencing a prayer.

"Reverend sir," said his attendant, who conceived this a very
suitable prelude to their further search, "would it not be well that
the people join with us in prayer?"

"Well-a-day!" cried the old clergyman, staring strangely around him.
"Art thou here with me, and none other?  Verily, past times were
present to me, and I deemed that I was to make a funeral prayer, as
many a time heretofore, from the head of this staircase.  Of a truth,
I saw the shades of many that are gone.  Yea, I have prayed at their
burials, one after another, and the Old Maid in the Winding-Sheet
hath seen them to their graves."

Being now more thoroughly awake to their present purpose, he took his
staff and struck forcibly on the floor, till there came an echo from
each deserted chamber, but no menial to answer their summons.  They,
therefore, walked along the passage, and again paused, opposite to
the great front window, through which was seen the crowd in the
shadow and partial moonlight of the street beneath.  On the right
hand was the open door of a chamber, and a closed one on their left.

The clergyman pointed his cane to the carved oak panel of the latter.

"Within that chamber," observed he, "a whole lifetime since, did I
sit by the deathbed of a goodly young man who, being now at the last
gasp--"  Apparently, there was some powerful excitement in the ideas
which had now flashed across his mind.  He snatched the torch from
his companion's hand, and threw open the door with such sudden
violence that the flame was extinguished, leaving them no other light
than the moonbeams which fell through two windows into the spacious
chamber.  It was sufficient to discover all that could be known.  In
a high-backed oaken armchair, upright, with her hands clasped across
her breast and her head thrown back, sat the Old Maid in the
Winding-Sheet.  The stately dame had fallen on her knees with her
forehead on the holy knees of the Old Maid, one hand upon the floor
and the other pressed convulsively against her heart.  It clutched a
lock of hair--once sable, now discolored with a greenish mold.

As the priest and layman advanced into the chamber the Old Maid's
features assumed such a semblance of shifting expression that they
trusted to hear the whole mystery explained by a single word.  But it
was only the shadow of a tattered curtain waving between the dead
face and the moonlight.

"Both dead!" said the venerable man.  "Then who shall divulge the
secret?  Methinks it glimmers to and fro in my mind like the light
and shadow across the Old Maid's face.  And now 'tis gone!"




WANDERING WILLIE'S TALE

BY SIR WAITER SCOTT

_Sir Walter Scott, born in Edinburgh in 1771 and died at "Abbotsford"
in 1832, published the first of his Waverley Novels ("Waverley") in
1814.  "Redgauntlet," in which "Wandering Willie's Tale" occurs,
appeared in 1824.  Wandering Willie, who tells the tale, is Willie
Steenson, a blind fiddler devoted to the Redgauntlet family.  Many
critics consider this the finest story in the English language.
Andrew Lang, who calls it "immortal," describes ft as "that perfect
model of a 'conte' in whose narrow range humor, poetry, the
grotesque, the terrible are combined as in no other work of man."_



WANDERING WILLIE'S TALE

By SIR WALTER SCOTT

Ye maun have heard of Sir Robert Redgauntlet of that Ilk, who lived
in these parts before the dear years.  The country will lang mind
him; and our fathers used to draw breath thick if ever they heard him
named.  He was out wi' the Hielandmen in Montrose's time; and again
he was in the hills wi' Glencairn in the saxteen hundred and
fifty-twa; and sae when King Charles the Second came in, wha was in
sic favor as the Laird of Redgauntlet?  He was knighted at Lonon
court, wi' the King's ain sword; and being a red-hot prelatist, he
came down here, rampauging like a lion, with commissions of
lieutenancy (and of lunacy, for what I ken), to put down a' the Whigs
and Covenanters in the country.  Wild wark they made of it; for the
Whigs were as dour as the Cavaliers were fierce, and it was which
should first tire the other.  Redgauntlet was aye for the strong
hand; and his name is kenn'd as wide in the country as Claverhouse's
or Tam Dalyell's.  Glen, nor dargle, nor mountain, nor cave could
hide the puir Hill-folk when Redgauntlet was out with bugle and
bloodhound after them, as if they had been sae mony deer.  And troth
when they fand them, they didna mak muckle mair ceremony than a
Hielandman wi' a roebuck.  It was just, "Will ye tak the test?"  If
not, "Make ready--present--fire!" and there lay the recusant.

Far and wide was Sir Robert hated and feared.  Men thought he had a
direct compact with Satan; that he was proof against steel, and that
bullets happed aff his buff-coat like hailstanes from a hearth; that
he had a mear that would turn a hare on the side of Carrifra
Gauns--and muckle to the same purpose, of whilk mair anon.  The best
blessing they wared on him was, "Deil scowp wi' Redgauntlet!"  He
wasna a bad maister to his ain folk though, and was weel aneugh liked
by his tenants; and as for the lackies and troopers that raid out wi'
him to the persecutions, as the Whigs ca'd those killing times, they
wad hae drunken themsells blind to his health at ony time.

Now you are to ken that my gudesire lived on Redgauntlet's grund;
they ca' the place Primrose Knowe.  We had lived on the grund, and
under the Redgauntlets, since the riding days, and lang before.  It
was a pleasant bit; and I think the air is callerer and fresher there
than onywhere else in the country.  It's a' deserted now; and I sat
on the broken door-cheek three days since, and was glad I couldna see
the plight the place was in; but that's a' wide o' the mark.  There
dwelt my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, a rambling, rattling chiel he
had been in his young days, and could play weel on the pipes; he was
famous at "Hoopers and Girders," a' Cumberland couldna touch him at
"Jockie Lattin," and he had the finest finger for the backlilt
between Berwick and Carlisle.  The like o' Steenie wasna the sort
that they made Whigs o'.  And so he became a Tory, as they ca' it,
which we now ca' Jacobites, just out of a kind of needcessity, that
he might belang to some side or other.  He had nae ill-will to the
Whig bodies, and liked little to see the blude rin, though being
obliged to follow Sir Robert in hunting and hosting, watching and
warding, he saw muckle mischief, and maybe did some, that he couldna
avoid.

Now Steenie was a kind of favorite with his master, and kenn'd a' the
folks about the castle, and was often sent for to play the pipes when
they were at their merriment.  Auld Dougal MacCallum, the butler,
that had followed Sir Robert through gude and ill, thick and thin,
pool and stream, was specially fond of the pipes, and aye gae my
gudesire his gude word wi' the laird; for Dougal could turn his
master round his finger.

Weel, round came the Revolution, and it had like to have broken the
hearts baith of Dougal and his master.  But the change was not
a'thegither sae great as they feared, and other folk thought for.
The Whigs made an unco crawing what they wad do with their auld
enemies, and in special wi' Sir Robert Redgauntlet.  But there were
ower mony great folks dipped in the same doings to mak a spick span
new warld.  So Parliament passed it a' ower easy; and Sir Robert,
bating that he was held to hunting foxes instead of Covenanters,
remained just the man he was.  His revel was as loud, and his hall as
weel lighted, as ever it had been, though maybe he lacked the fines
of the Nonconformists, that used to come to stock his larder and
cellar; for it is certain he began to be keener about the rents than
his tenants used to find him before, and they behoved to be prompt to
the rent-day, or else the laird wasna pleased.  And he was sic an
awsome body that naebody cared to anger him; for the oaths he swore,
and the rage that he used to get into, and the looks that he put on,
made men sometimes think him a devil incarnate.

Weel, my gudesire was nae manager--no that he was a very great
misguider--but he hadna the saving gift, and he got twa terms' rent
in arrear.  He got the first brash at Whitsunday put ower wi' fair
word and piping; but when Martinmas came, there was a summons from
the grund-officer to come wi' the rent on a day preceese, or else
Steenie behoved to flit.  Sair wark he had to get the siller; but he
was weel-freended, and at last he got the haill scraped thegither--a
thousand merks; the maist of it was from a neighbor they ca'd Laurie
Lapraik--a sly tod.  Laurie had walth o' gear--could hunt wi' the
hound and rin wi' the hare--and be Whig or Tory, saunt or sinner, as
the wind stood.  He was a professor in this Revolution warld; but he
liked an orra sough of this warld, and a tune on the pipes weel
aneugh at a bytime; and abune a' he thought he had gude security for
the siller he lent my gudesire ower the stocking at Primrose Knowe.

Away trots my gudesire to Redgauntlet Castle, wi' a heavy purse and a
light heart, glad to be out of the laird's danger.  Weel, the first
thing he learned at the castle was that Sir Robert had fretted
himsell into a fit of the gout, because he did not appear before
twelve o'clock.  It wasna a'thegither for sake of the money, Dougal
thought; but because he didna like to part wi' my gudesire aff the
grund.  Dougal was glad to see Steenie, and brought him into the
great oak parlor, and there sat the laird his leesome lane, excepting
that he had beside him a great ill-favored jackanape, that was a
special pet of his--a cankered beast it was, and mony an ill-natured
trick it played; ill to please it was, and easily angered--ran about
the haill castle, chattering and yowling, and pinching and biting
folk, especially before ill weather, or disturbances in the state.
Sir Robert ca'd it Major Weir, after the warlock that was burnt;* and
few folk liked either the name or the conditions of the
creature--they thought there was something in it by ordinar--and my
gudesire was not just easy in mind when the door shut on him, and he
saw himself in the room wi' naebody but the laird, Dougal MacCallum,
and the major, a thing that hadna chanced to him before.


* A celebrated wizard, executed (1670) at Edinburgh for sorcery and
other crimes.


Sir Robert sat, or, I should say, lay, in a great armed chair, wi'
his grand velvet gown, and his feet on a cradle; for he had baith
gout and gravel, and his face looked as gash and ghastly as Satan's.
Major Weir sat opposite to him, in a red laced coat, and the laird's
wig on his head; and aye as Sir Robert girned wi' pain, the jackanape
girned too, like a sheep's-head between a pair of tangs--an
ill-faured, fearsome couple they were.  The laird's buff-coat was
hung on a pin behind him, and his broadsword and his pistols within
reach; for he keepit up the auld fashion of having the weapons ready,
and a horse saddled day and night, just as he used to do when he was
able to loup on horseback, and away after ony of the Hill-folk he
could get speerings of.  Some said it was for fear of the Whigs
taking vengeance, but I judge it was just his auld custom--he wasna
gien to fear onything.  The rental-book, wi' its black cover and
brass clasps, was lying beside him; and a book of sculduggery sangs
was put betwixt the leaves, to keep it open at the place where it
bore evidence against the goodman of Primrose Knowe, as behind the
hand with his mails and duties.  Sir Robert gave my gudesire a look
as if he would have withered his heart in his bosom.  Ye maun ken he
had a way of bending his brows that men saw the visible mark of a
horseshoe in his forehead, deep-dinted, as if it had been stamped
there.

"Are ye come light-handed, ye son of a toom whistle?" said Sir
Robert.  "Zounds! if you are--"

My gudesire, with as gude a countenance as he could put on, made a
leg, and placed the bag of money on the table wi' a dash, like a man
that does something clever.  The laird drew it to him hastily.  "Is
it all here, Steenie, man?"

"Your honor will find it right," said my gudesire.

"Here, Dougal," said the laird, "gie Steenie a tass of brandy
downstairs, till I count the siller and write the receipt."

But they werena weel out of the room when Sir Robert gied a yelloch
that garr'd the castle rock.  Back ran Dougal--in flew the
livery-men--yell on yell gied the laird, ilk ane mair awfu' than the
ither.  My gudesire knew not whether to stand or flee, but he
ventured back into the parlor, where a' was gaun
hirdie-girdie--naebody to say "come in" or "gae out."  Terribly the
laird roared for cauld water to his feet, and wine to cool his
throat; and "Hell, hell, hell, and its flames," was aye the word in
his mouth.  They brought him water, and when they plunged his swoln
feet into the tub, he cried out it was burning; and folk say that it
did bubble and sparkle like a seething caldron.  He flung the cup at
Dougal's head, and said he had given him blood instead of burgundy;
and, sure aneugh, the lass washed clotted blood aff the carpet the
neist day.  The jackanape they ca'd Major Weir, it jibbered and cried
as if it was mocking its master.  My gudesire's head was like to
turn: he forgot baith siller and receipt, and downstairs he banged;
but as he ran, the shrieks came faint and fainter; there was a
deep-drawn shivering groan, and word gaed through the castle that the
laird was dead.

Weel, away came my gudesire wi' his finger in his mouth, and his best
hope was that Dougal had seen the moneybag, and heard the laird speak
of writing the receipt.  The young laird, now Sir John, came from
Edinburgh to see things put to rights.  Sir John and his father never
gree'd weel.  Sir John had been bred an advocate, and afterward sat
in the last Scots Parliament and voted for the Union, having gotten,
it was thought, a rug of the compensations; if his father could have
come out of his grave he would have brained him for it on his awn
hearthstane.  Some thought it was easier counting with the auld rough
knight than the fair-spoken young ane--but mair of that anon.

Dougal MacCallum, poor body, neither grat nor graned, but gaed about
the house looking like a corpse, but directing, as was his duty, a'
the order of the grand funeral.  Now, Dougal looked aye waur and waur
when night was coming, and was aye the last to gang to his bed, whilk
was in a little round just opposite the chamber of dais, whilk his
master occupied while he was living, and where he now lay in state,
as they ca'd it, weel-a-day!  The night before the funeral, Dougal
could keep his awn counsel nae langer: he came doun with his proud
spirit, and fairly asked auld Hutcheon to sit in his room with him
for an hour.  When they were in the round, Dougal took ae tass of
brandy to himsell and gave another to Hutcheon, and wished him all
health and lang life, and said that, for himsell, he wasna lang for
this world; for that, every night since Sir Robert's death, his
silver call had sounded from the state chamber, just as it used to do
at nights in his lifetime, to call Dougal to help to turn him in his
bed.  Dougal said that, being alone with the dead on that floor of
the tower (for naebody cared to wake Sir Robert Redgauntlet like
another corpse), he had never daured to answer the call, but that now
his conscience checked him for neglecting his duty; for, "though
death breaks service," said MacCallum, "it shall never break my
service to Sir Robert; and I will answer his next whistle, so be you
will stand by me, Hutcheon."

Hutcheon had nae will to work, but he had stood by Dougal in battle
and broil, and he wad not fail him at this pinch; so down the carles
sat ower a stoup of brandy, and Hutcheon, who was something of a
clerk, would have read a chapter of the Bible; but Dougal would hear
naething but a blaud of Davie Lindsay, whilk was the waur preparation.

When midnight came, and the house was quiet as the grave, sure aneugh
the silver whistle sounded as sharp and shrill as if Sir Robert was
blowing it, and up gat the twa auld serving-men and tottered into the
room where the dead man lay.  Hutcheon saw aneugh at the first
glance; for there were torches in the room, which showed him the foul
fiend in his ain shape, sitting on the laird's coffin!  Ower he
couped as if he had been dead.  He could not tell how lang he lay in
a trance at the door, but when he gathered himsell he cried on his
neighbor, and getting nae answer, raised the house, when Dougal was
found lying dead within twa steps of the bed where his master's
coffin was placed.  As for the whistle, it was gaen anes and aye; but
mony a time was it heard at the top of the house on the bartizan, and
amang the auld chimneys and turrets, where the howlets have their
nests.  Sir John hushed the matter up, and the funeral passed over
without mair bogle-wark.

But when a' was ower, and the laird was beginning to settle his
affairs, every tenant was called up for his arrears, and my gudesire
for the full sum that stood him in the rental-book.  Weel, away he
trots to the castle, to tell his story, and there he is introduced to
Sir John, sitting in his father's chair, in deep mourning, with
weepers and hanging cravat, and a small walking rapier by his side,
instead of the auld broadsword that had a hundredweight of steel
about it, what with blade, chape, and basket-hilt.  I have heard
their communing so often tauld ower, that I almost think I was there
mysell, though I couldna be born at the time.  (In fact, Alan, my
companion mimicked, with a good deal of humor, the flattering,
conciliating tone of the tenant's address, and the hypocritical
melancholy of the laird's reply.  His grandfather, he said, had,
while he spoke, his eye fixed on the rental-book, as if it were a
mastiff-dog that he was afraid would spring up and bite him.)

"I wuss ye joy, sir, of the head seat, and the white loaf, and the
braid lairdship.  Your father was a kind man to friends and
followers; muckle grace to you, Sir John, to fill his shoon--his
boots, I suld say, for he seldom wore shoon, unless it were muils
when he had the gout."

"Ay, Steenie," quoth the laird, sighing deeply, and putting his
napkin to his een, "his was a sudden call, and he will be missed in
the country; no time to set his house in order: weel prepared
Godward, no doubt, which is the root of the matter, but left us
behind a tangled hesp to wind, Steenie.  Hem! hem!  We maun go to
business, Steenie; much to do, and little time to do it in."

Here he opened the fatal volume.  I have heard of a thing they call
Doomsday Book--I am clear it has been a rental of back-ganging
tenants.

"Stephen," said Sir John, still in the same soft, sleekit tone of
voice--"Stephen Stevenson, or Steenson, ye are down here for a year's
rent behind the hand, due at last term."

Stephen.  "Please your honor, Sir John, I paid it to your father."

Sir John.  "Ye took a receipt then, doubtless, Stephen, and can
produce it?"

Stephen.  "Indeed I hadna time, an it like your honor; for nae sooner
had I set doun the siller, and just as his honor Sir Robert, that's
gaen, drew it till him to count it, and write out the receipt, he was
ta'en wi' the pains that removed him."

"That was unlucky," said Sir John, after a pause.  "But ye maybe paid
it in the presence of somebody.  I want but a talis qualis evidence,
Stephen.  I would go ower strictly to work with no poor man."

Stephen.  "Troth, Sir John, there was naebody in the room but Dougal
MacCallum, the butler.  But, as your honor kens, he has e'en followed
his auld master."

"Very unlucky again, Stephen," said Sir John, without altering his
voice a single note.  "The man to whom ye paid the money is dead; and
the man who witnessed the payment is dead too; and the siller, which
should have been to the fore, is neither seen nor heard tell of in
the repositories.  How am I to believe a' this?"

Stephen.  "I dinna ken, your honor; but there is a bit memorandum
note of the very coins--for, God help me!  I had to borrow out of
twenty purses--and I am sure that ilka man there set down will take
his grit oath for what purpose I borrowed the money."

Sir John.  "I have little doubt ye borrowed the money, Steenie.  It
is the payment to my father that I want to have some proof of."

Stephen.  "The siller maun be about the house, Sir John.  And since
your honor never got it, and his honor that was canna have ta'en it
wi' him, maybe some of the family may have seen it."

Sir John.  "We will examine the servants, Stephen; that is but
reasonable."

But lackey and lass, and page and groom, all denied stoutly that they
had ever seen such a bag of money as my gudesire described.  What was
waur, he had unluckily not mentioned to any living soul of them his
purpose of paying his rent.  Ae quean had noticed something under his
arm, but she took it for the pipes.

Sir John Redgauntlet ordered the servants out of the room, and then
said to my gudesire: "Now, Steenie, ye see you have fair play; and,
as I have little doubt ye ken better where to find the siller than
any other body, I beg, in fair terms, and for your own sake, that you
will end this fasherie; for, Stephen, ye maun pay or flit."

"The Lord forgie your opinion," said Stephen, driven almost to his
wit's-end--"I am an honest man."

"So am I, Stephen," said his honor; "and so are all the folks in the
house, I hope.  But if there be a knave among us, it must be he that
tells the story he can not prove."  He paused, and then added, mair
sternly: "If I understand your trick, sir, you want to take advantage
of some malicious reports concerning things in this family, and
particularly respecting my father's sudden death, thereby to cheat me
out of the money, and perhaps take away my character, by insinuating
that I have received the rent I am demanding.  Where do you suppose
this money to be?  I insist upon knowing."

My gudesire saw everything look sae muckle against him that he grew
nearly desperate; however, he shifted from one foot to another,
looked to every corner of the room, and made no answer.

"Speak out, sirrah," said the laird, assuming a look of his
father's--a very particular ane, which he had when he was angry: it
seemed as if the wrinkles of his frown made that selfsame fearful
shape of a horse's shoe in the middle of his brow--"speak out, sir!
I will know your thoughts.  Do you suppose that I have this money?"

"Far be it frae me to say so," said Stephen.

"Do you charge any of my people with having taken it?"

"I wad be laith to charge them that may be innocent," said my
gudesire; "and if there be any one that is guilty, I have nae proof."

"Somewhere the money must be, if there is a word of truth in your
story," said Sir John; "I ask where you think it is, and demand a
correct answer?"

"In hell, if you will have my thoughts of it," said my gudesire,
driven to extremity--"in hell! with your father, his jackanape, and
his silver whistle."

Down the stairs he ran, for the parlor was nae place for him after
such a word, and he heard the laird swearing blood and wounds behind
him, as fast as ever did Sir Robert, and roaring for the bailie and
the baron-officer.

Away rode my gudesire to his chief creditor, him they ca'd Laurie
Lapraik, to try if he could make onything out of him; but when he
tauld his story, he got but the warst word in his wame--thief,
beggar, and dyvour were the safest terms; and to the boot of these
hard terms, Laurie brought up the auld story of his dipping his hand
in the blood of God's saunts, just as if a tenant could have helped
riding with the laird, and that a laird like Sir Robert Redgauntlet.
My gudesire was by this time far beyond the bounds of patience, and
while he and Laurie were at deil speed the liars, he was wanchancie
aneugh to abuse Lapraik's doctrine as weel as the man, and said
things that garr'd folks' flesh grue that heard them; he wasna just
himsell, and he had lived wi' a wild set in his day.

At last they parted, and my gudesire was to ride hame through the
wood of Pitmurkie, that is a' fou of black firs, as they say.  I ken
the wood, but the firs may be black or white for what I can tell.  At
the entry of the wood there is a wild common, and on the edge of the
common a little lonely change-house, that was keepit then by a
hostler-wife--they suld hae ca'd her Tibbie Faw--and there puir
Steenie cried for a mutchkin of brandy, for he had had no refreshment
the haill day.  Tibbie was earnest wi' him to take a bite o' meat,
but he couldna think o't, nor would he take his foot out of the
stirrup, and took off the brandy wholly at twa drafts, and named a
toast at each--the first was, the memory of Sir Robert Redgauntlet,
and might he never lie quiet in his grave till he had righted his
poor bond-tenant; and the second was, a health to Man's Enemy, if he
would but get him back the pock of siller, or tell him what came o't,
for he saw the haill world was like to regard him as a thief and a
cheat, and he took that waur than even the ruin of his house and
hauld.

On he rode, little caring where.  It was a dark night turned, and the
trees made it yet darker, and he let the beast take its ain road
through the wood; when, all of a sudden, from tired and wearied that
it was before, the nag began to spring, and flee, and stend, that my
gudesire could hardly keep the saddle; upon the whilk, a horseman,
suddenly riding up beside him, said, "That's a mettle beast of yours,
freend; will you sell him?"  So saying, he touched the horse's neck
with his riding-wand, and it fell into its auld heigh-ho of a
stumbling trot.  "But his spunk's soon out of him, I think,"
continued the stranger, "and that is like mony a man's courage, that
thinks he wad do great things till he come to the proof."

My gudesire scarce listened to this, but spurred his horse, with
"Gude e'en to you, freend."

But it's like the stranger was ane that doesna lightly yield his
point; for, ride as Steenie liked, he was aye beside him at the
salfsame pace.  At last my gudesire, Steenie Steenson, grew half
angry and, to say the truth, half feared.

"What is it that ye want with me, freend?" he said.  "If ye be a
robber, I have nae money; if ye be a leal man, wanting company, I
have nae heart to mirth or speaking; and if ye want to ken the road,
I scarce ken it mysell."

"If you will tell me your grief," said the stranger, "I am one that,
though I have been sair misca'd in the world, am the only hand for
helping my freends."

So my gudesire, to ease his ain heart, mair than from any hope of
help, told him the story from beginning to end.

"It's a hard pinch," said the stranger; "but I think I can help you."

"If you could lend the money, sir, and take a lang day--I ken nae
other help on earth," said my gudesire.

"But there may be some under the earth," said the stranger.  "Come,
I'll be frank wi' you; I could lend you the money on bond, but you
would maybe scruple my terms.  Now, I can tell you that your auld
laird is disturbed in his grave by your curses, and the wailing of
your family, and if ye daur venture to go to see him, he will give
you the receipt."

My gudesire's hair stood on end at this proposal, but he thought his
companion might be some humorsome chield that was trying to frighten
him, and might end with lending him the money.  Besides, he was bauld
wi' brandy, and desperate wi' distress; and he said he had courage to
go to the gate of hell, and a step farther, for that receipt.

The stranger laughed.

Weel, they rode on through the thickest of the wood, when, all of a
sudden, the horse stopped at the door of a great house; and, but that
he knew the place was ten miles off, my gudesire would have thought
he was at Redgauntlet Castle.  They rode into the outer courtyard,
through the muckle faulding yetts, and aneath the auld portcullis;
and the whole front of the house was lighted, and there were pipes
and fiddles, and as much dancing and deray within as used to be in
Sir Robert's house at Pace and Yule, and such high seasons.  They lap
off, and my gudesire, as seemed to him, fastened his horse to the
very ring he had tied him to that morning, when he gaed to wait on
the young Sir John.

"God!" said my gudesire, "if Sir Robert's death be but a dream!"

He knocked at the ha' door just as he was wont, and his auld
acquaintance, Dougal MacCallum, just after his wont, too, came to
open the door, and said, "Piper Steenie, are ye there, lad?  Sir
Robert has been crying for you."

My gudesire was like a man in a dream; he looked for the stranger,
but he was gane for the time.  At last he just tried to say, "Ha!
Dougal Driveower, are ye living?  I thought ye had been dead."

"Never fash yoursell wi' me," said Dougal, "but look to yoursell; and
see ye tak naething frae onybody here, neither meat, drink, or
siller, except just the receipt that is your ain."

So saying, he led the way out through halls and trances that were
weel kenn'd to my gudesire, and into the auld oak parlor; and there
was as much singing of profane sangs, and birling of red wine, and
speaking blasphemy and sculduddry, as had ever been in Redgauntlet
Castle when it was at the blythest.

But, Lord take us in keeping! what a set of ghastly revelers they
were that sat round that table!  My gudesire kenn'd mony that had
long before gane to their place, for often had he piped to the most
part in the hall of Redgauntlet.  There was the fierce Middleton, and
the dissolute Rothes, and the crafty Lauderdale; and Dalyell, with
his bald head and a beard to his girdle; and Earlshall, with
Cameron's blude on his hand; and wild Bonshaw, that tied blessed Mr.
Cargill's limbs till the blude sprung; and Dumbarton Douglas, the
twice-turned traitor baith to country and king.  There was the Bluidy
Advocate MacKenyie, who, for his worldly wit and wisdom, had been to
the rest as a god.  And there was Claverhouse, as beautiful as when
he lived, with his long dark, curled locks, streaming down over his
laced buff-coat, and his left hand always on his right spule-blade,
to hide the wound that the silver bullet had made.  He sat apart from
them all, and looked at them with a melancholy, haughty countenance;
while the rest hallooed, and sung, and laughed, that the room rang.
But their smiles were fearfully contorted from time to time; and
their laughter passed into such wild sounds as made my gudesire's
very nails grow blue, and chilled the marrow in his banes.

They that waited at the table were just the wicked serving-men and
troopers that had done their work and cruel bidding on earth.  There
was the Lang Lad of the Nethertown, that helped to take Argyle; and
the bishop's summoner, that they called the Deil's Rattle-bag; and
the wicked guardsmen, in their laced coats; and the savage Highland
Amorites, that shed blood like water; and mony a proud serving-man,
haughty of heart and bloody of hand, cringing to the rich, and making
them wickeder than they would be; grinding the poor to powder, when
the rich had broken them to fragments.  And mony, mony mair were
coming and ganging, a' as busy in their vocation as if they had been
alive.

Sir Robert Redgauntlet, in the midst of a' this fearful riot, cried,
wi' a voice like thunder, on Steenie Piper to come to the board-head
where he was sitting, his legs stretched out before him, and swathed
up with flannel, with his holster pistols aside him, while the great
broadsword rested against his chair, just as my gudesire had seen him
the last time upon earth--the very cushion for the jackanape was
close to him, but the creature itsell was not there; it wasna its
hour, it's likely; for he heard them say as he came forward, "Is not
the major come yet?"  And another answered, "The jackanape will be
here betimes the morn."  And when my gudesire came forward, Sir
Robert, or his ghaist, or the deevil in his likeness, said, "Weel,
piper, hae ye settled wi' my son for the year's rent?"

With much ado my father gat breath to say that Sir John would not
settle without his honor's receipt.

"Ye shall hae that for a tune of the pipes, Steenie," said the
appearance of Sir Robert.  "Play us up, 'Weel noddled, Luckie.'"

Now this was a tune my gudesire learned frae a warlock, that heard it
when they were worshiping Satan at their meetings, and my gudesire
had sometimes played it at the ranting suppers in Redgauntlet Castle,
but never very willingly; and now he grew cauld at the very name of
it, and said, for excuse, he hadna his pipes wi' him.

"MacCallum, ye limb of Beelzebub," said the fearfu' Sir Robert,
"bring Steenie the pipes that I am keeping for him!"

MacCallum brought a pair of pipes might have served the piper of
Donald of the Isles.  But he gave my gudesire a nudge as he offered
them; and looking secretly and closely, Steenie saw that the chanter
was of steel, and heated to a white heat; so he had fair warning not
to trust his fingers with it.  So he excused himself again, and said
he was faint and frightened, and had not wind enough to fill the bag.

"Then ye maun eat and drink, Steenie," said the figure; "for we do
little else here; and it's ill speaking between a fou man and a
fasting."

Now these were the very words that the bloody Earl of Douglas said to
keep the king's messenger in hand, while he cut the head off
MacLellan of Bombie, at the Threave Castle, and that put Steenie mair
and mair on his guard.  So he spoke up like a man, and said he came
neither to eat, or drink, or make minstrelsy, but simply for his
ain--to ken what was come o' the money he had paid, and to get a
discharge for it; and he was so stout-hearted by this time, that he
charged Sir Robert for conscience' sake (he had no power to say the
holy name), and as he hoped for peace and rest, to spread no snares
for him, but just to give him his ain.

The appearance gnashed its teeth and laughed, but it took from a
large pocket-book the receipt, and handed it to Steenie.  "There is
your receipt, ye pitiful cur; and for the money, my dog-whelp of a
son may go look for it in the Cat's Cradle."

My gudesire uttered mony thanks, and was about to retire when Sir
Robert roared aloud: "Stop though, thou sack-doudling son of a whore!
I am not done with thee.  _Here_ we do nothing for nothing; and you
must return on this very day twelvemonth to pay your master the
homage that you owe me for my protection."

My father's tongue was loosed of a suddenty, and he said aloud: "I
refer mysell to God's pleasure, and not to yours."

He had no sooner uttered the word than all was dark around him, and
he sunk on the earth with such a sudden shock that he lost both
breath and sense.

How lang Steenie lay there, he could not tell; but when he came to
himsell, he was lying in the auld kirkyard of Redgauntlet parochine,
just at the door of the family aisle, and the scutcheon of the auld
knight, Sir Robert, hanging over his head.  There was a deep morning
fog on grass and gravestane around him, and his horse was feeding
quietly beside the minister's twa cows.  Steenie would have thought
the whole was a dream, but he had the receipt in his hand, fairly
written and signed by the auld laird; only the last letters of his
name were a little disorderly, written like one seized with sudden
pain.

Sorely troubled in his mind, he left that dreary place, rode through
the mist to Redgauntlet Castle, and with much ado he got speech of
the laird.

"Well, you dyvour bankrupt," was the first word, "have you brought me
my rent?"

"No," answered my gudesire, "I have not; but I have brought your
honor Sir Robert's receipt for it."

"How, sirrah?  Sir Robert's receipt!  You told me he had not given
you one."

"Will your honor please to see if that bit line is right?"

Sir John looked at every line, and at every letter, with much
attention, and at last at the date, which my gudesire had not
observed--"'From my appointed place,'" he read, "'this twenty-fifth
of November.'  What!  That is yesterday!  Villain, thou must have
gone to Hell for this!"

"I got it from your honor's father; whether he be in Heaven or Hell,
I know not," said Steenie.

"I will delate you for a warlock to the privy council!" said Sir
John.  "I will send you to your master, the devil, with the help of a
tar-barrel and a torch!"

"I intend to delate mysell to the presbytery," said Steenie, "and
tell them all I have seen last night, whilk are things fitter for
them to judge of than a borrel man like me."

Sir John paused, composed himsell, and desired to hear the full
history; and my gudesire told it him from point to point, as I have
told it you--word for word, neither more nor less.

Sir John was silent again for a long time, and at last he said, very
composedly: "Steenie, this story of yours concerns the honor of many
a noble family besides mine; and if it be a leasing-making, to keep
yourself out of my danger, the least you can expect is to have a
red-hot iron driven through your tongue, and that will be as bad as
scauding your fingers with a red-hot chanter.  But yet it may be
true, Steenie; and if the money cast up, I shall not know what to
think of it.  But where shall we find the Cat's Cradle?  There are
cats enough about the old house, but I think they kitten without the
ceremony of bed or cradle."

"We were best ask Hutcheon," said my gudesire; "he kens a' the odd
corners about as weel as--another serving-man that is now gane, and
that I wad not like to name."

Aweel, Hutcheon, when he was asked, told them that a ruinous turret,
lang disused, next to the clock-house, only accessible by a ladder,
for the opening was on the outside, and far above the battlements,
was called of old the Cat's Cradle.

"There will I go immediately," said Sir John; and he took (with what
purpose, Heaven kens) one of his father's pistols from the
hall-table, where they had lain since the night he died, and hastened
to the battlements.

It was a dangerous place to climb, for the ladder was auld and frail,
and wanted ane or twa rounds.  However, up got Sir John, and entered
at the turret door, where his body stopped the only little light that
was in the bit turret.  Something flees at him wi' a vengeance, maist
dang him back ower; bang gaed the knight's pistol, and Hutcheon, that
held the ladder, and my gudesire that stood beside him, hears a loud
skelloch.  A minute after, Sir John flings the body of the jackanape
down to them, and cries that the siller is fund, and that they should
come up and help him.  And there was the bag of siller sure aneugh,
and mony orra things besides that had been missing for mony a day.
And Sir John, when he had riped the turret weel, led my gudesire into
the dining-parlor, and took him by the hand, and spoke kindly to him,
and said he was sorry he should have doubted his word, and that he
would hereafter be a good master to him, to make amends.

"And now, Steenie," said Sir John, "although this vision of yours
tends, on the whole, to my father's credit, as an honest man, that he
should, even after his death, desire to see justice done to a poor
man like you, yet you are sensible that ill-dispositioned men might
make bad constructions upon it, concerning his soul's health.  So, I
think, we had better lay the haill dirdum on that ill-deedie
creature, Major Weir, and say naething about your dream in the wood
of Pitmurkie, You had taken ower muckle brandy to be very certain
about onything; and, Steenie, this receipt (his hand shook while he
held it out), it's but a queer kind of document, and we will do best,
I think, to put it quietly in the fire."

"Od, but for as queer as it is, it's a' the voucher I have for my
rent," said my gudesire, who was afraid, it may be, of losing the
benefit of Sir Robert's discharge.

"I will bear the contents to your credit in the rental-book, and give
you a discharge under my own hand," said Sir John, "and that on the
spot.  And, Steenie, if you can hold your tongue about this matter,
you shall sit, from this term downward, at an easier rent."

"Mony thanks to your honor," said Steenie, who saw easily in what
corner the wind was; "doubtless I will be conformable to all your
honor's commands; only I would willingly speak wi' some powerful
minister on the subject, for I do not like the sort of summons of
appointment whilk your honor's father--"

"Do not call the phantom my father!" said Sir John, interrupting him.

"Weel, then, the thing that was so like him," said my gudesire; "he
spoke of my coming back to him this time twelvemonth, and it's a
weight on my conscience."

"Aweel, then," said Sir John, "if you be so much distressed in mind,
you speak to our minister of the parish; he is a douce man, regards
the honor of our family, and the mair that he may look for some
patronage from me."

Wi' that my gudesire readily agreed that the receipt should be
burned, and the laird threw it into the chimney with his ain hand.
Burn it would not for them, though; but away it flew up the lum, wi'
a lang train of sparks at its tail, and a hissing noise like a squib.

My gudesire gaed down to the manse, and the minister, when he had
heard the story, said it was his real opinion that, though my
gudesire had gaen very far in tampering with dangerous matters, yet,
as he had refused the devil's arles (for such was the offer of meat
and drink), and had refused to do homage by piping at his bidding, he
hoped, that if he held a circumspect walk hereafter, Satan could take
little advantage by what was come and gane.  And, indeed, my
gudesire, of his ain accord, lang foreswore baith the pipes and the
brandy; it was not even till the year was out, and the fatal day
passed, that he would so much as take the fiddle, or drink usquebaugh
or tippenny.

Sir John made up his story about the jackanape as he liked himsell;
and some believe till this day there was no more in the matter than
the filching nature of the brute.  Indeed, ye'll no hinder some to
threap that it was nane o' the Auld Enemy that Dougal and Hutcheon
saw in the laird's room, but only that wanchancie creature, the
major, capering on the coffin; and that, as to the blawing on the
laird's whistle that was heard after he was dead, the filthy brute
could do that as weel as the laird himsell, if no better.  But Heaven
kens the truth, whilk first came out by the minister's wife, after
Sir John and her ain gudeman were baith in the molds.  And then, my
gudesire, wha was failed in his limbs, but not in his judgment or
memory--at least nothing to speak of--was obliged to tell the real
narrative to his freends for the credit of his good name.  He might
else have been charged for a warlock.


The shades of evening were growing thicker around us as my conductor
finished his long narrative with this moral: "Ye see, birkie, it is
nae chancy thing to tak a stranger traveler for a guide when ye are
in an uncouth land."

"I should not have made that inference," said I.  "Your grandfather's
adventure was fortunate for himself, whom it saved from ruin and
distress; and fortunate for his landlord also, whom it prevented from
committing a gross act of injustice."

"Ay, but they had baith to sup the sauce o't sooner or later," said
Wandering Willie.  "What was fristed wasna forgiven.  Sir John died
before he was much over threescore; and it was just like of a
moment's illness.  And for my gudesire, though he departed in fulness
of years, yet there was my father, a yauld man of forty-five, fell
down betwixt the stilts of his pleugh, and raise never again, and
left nae bairn but me, a puir sightless, fatherless, motherless
creature, could neither work nor want.  Things gaed weel aneugh at
first; for Sir Redwald Redgauntlet, the only son of Sir John, and the
oye of auld Sir Robert, and, wae's me! the last of the honorable
house, took the farm off our hands, and brought me into his household
to have care of me.  He liked music, and I had the best teachers
baith England and Scotland could gie me.  Mony a merry year was I wi'
him; but wae's me! he gaed out with other pretty men in the
Forty-five--I'll say nae mair about it.  My head never settled weel
since I lost him; and if I say another word about it, deil a bar will
I have the heart to play the night.  Look out, my gentle chap," he
resumed, in a different tone, "ye should see the lights in Brokenburn
Glen by this time."